CNN Articles1 Biden promises to be 'a president for all Americans'
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_8d592dfc36fb40399ece8b2aabdcd432
(CNN) - President-elect Joe Biden and Vice President-elect Kamala Harris took their oaths of office Wednesday in a historic inauguration. Harris will be the first female, the first Black and first South Asian vice president of the United States. After a tumultuous year that began a new chapter of the civil rights movement as Americans took to the streets to protest against racial injustice and police brutality after the police killing of George Floyd, the swearing in was a remarkable achievement for a country that has often struggled to live up to its ideals of equality for all. Harris took the oath on two Bibles -- one that belonged to former Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall, one of her heroes who inspired her to pursue a career in the law, and that of Regina Shelton, a neighbor who cared for Harris and her sister Maya when they were growing up and attended church with her, where she was introduced to the teachings of the Bible. Harris has described Shelton as a "second mother to us." After campaigning on a promise to heal a fractured nation, Biden will begin the work of uniting the country Wednesday when he is sworn in as the 46th president of the United States on the West Front of the US Capitol -- a mere two weeks after insurrectionists incited by President Donald Trump stormed the building and tried to overturn the election results based on Trump's lies.  Biden arrived at the Capitol Wednesday morning, after Trump -- the first president in more than 150 years to refuse to attend his successor's swearing-in ceremony -- had left Washington, DC. Vice President Mike Pence, who was in the Capitol when it was stormed by a violent mob earlier this month, and second lady Karen Pence walked out onto the inaugural stands to bipartisan applause.  Live Updates: The inauguration of Joe Biden More than 25,000 National Guard troops are in place to ensure that the nation's transfer of power can take place peacefully. Trump left the White House as president for the last time Wednesday morning, flying to Florida with first lady Melania Trump before the swearing-in ceremonies, dispensing with the tradition of greeting the incoming President and first lady at the White House and riding with them to the Capitol. CNN's Kate Bennett reported that White House chief usher Timothy Harleth will meet the Bidens later at the White House.  On his way out of the Washington area, Trump -- who was not wearing a mask -- again used the racist term "China virus" to describe the coronavirus, describing it in the past tense, and touted his administration's work on developing a vaccine. He thanked his staff and family and wished the next administration "great success" but did not mention his successor by name. "We love you, this has been an incredible four years," Trump said in unscripted remarks at Joint Base Andrews shortly before leaving for Florida. "We've accomplished so much." "I will always fight for you. I will be watching. I will be listening." After decades in politics, Biden will deliver the most important speech of his life on Wednesday at a time when the nation is gripped by a seemingly uncontrollable pandemic, an economic collapse that has left millions unemployed and deep divisions over issues of racial justice and police brutality. In a speech that is expected to span 20 to 30 minutes, Biden will speak about how he hopes to unite the country, and is expected to reflect on the theme at the root of his presidential campaign: restoring the "soul of the nation." Biden plans to call on all Americans to meet the extraordinary challenges facing the nation by coming together around the idea that he often mentioned on the campaign trail: that there is nothing the country can't do "when we do it together," according to advisers to the President-elect. He will have his hand on the Biden family Bible, which has a Celtic Cross on the cover and has been a family heirloom since 1893. The President-elect has used the Bible each time he has taken an oath of office, both as a senator from Delaware and as vice president, and his son Beau Biden used the Bible when he was sworn in as attorney general of Delaware in 2007. Vice President-elect Kamala Harris -- who will make history Wednesday when she is sworn in as the first female, the first Black and first South Asian vice president -- will be sworn in on two Bibles, that of former Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall, one of her heroes who inspired her to pursue a career in the law, and one that belonged to Regina Shelton, a neighbor who cared for Harris and her sister Maya when they were growing up and attended church with her, where she was introduced to the teachings of the Bible. Harris has described Shelton as a "second mother to us." The task of the incoming president has been complicated by the fact that Trump has still not conceded the election, has impeded the transition between administrations and was consumed in his final days with planning his own departure ceremony and weighing whom to pardon. But Trump left the White House as a disgraced and diminished figure. CNN's White House team has reported that although dozens of current and former officials had been invited to the Wednesday morning farewell ceremony, many declined to attend. Pence said his final goodbyes to Trump on Tuesday. Biden and Harris attended a service at the Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle in DC ahead of the inaugural ceremonies with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy, in a show of unity and Biden's intent to work with leaders from both parties.  Honoring the victims of Covid-19 Biden has largely ignored Trump's final slights against the democratic process in the final hours before the inauguration as he demonstrates what a different president he will be.  After a year in which Trump denied the seriousness of the pandemic -- often brushing aside the painful loss of life with erroneous boasts that the US death rate was better than in many other countries -- Biden's first act upon arriving in Washington Tuesday afternoon was to honor the victims of the coronavirus in a solemn ceremony, making it clear that offering compassion and understanding to Americans will be just as central to his mission as preventing more tragedy. Moments before 400 columns of light were illuminated on the edges of the Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool to honor the lives lost, Biden invited Americans to mourn as he grieved alongside them -- a moment that was extraordinary because there has been nothing like it during the Trump administration. The former vice president has long been defined by his innate ability to comfort strangers he has met throughout his journey in politics, because of his experience working through tragedies in his own life -- from the loss of his first wife and his infant daughter in a 1972 car accident to the death of Beau Biden in 2015.  He encapsulated the lessons of those personal experiences in his tribute to Covid-19 victims on the eve of taking the oath of office: "It's hard sometimes to remember, but that's how we heal," he said at the memorial. "It's important to do that as a nation."  Biden turns his focus Wednesday to his plans to unite the country, to broker compromise with political opponents, and turn the Trump administration's overly politicized response to the pandemic into a functional operation that can accelerate the delivery of vaccines to Americans and right the flagging US economy.  He wants to show that he will move swiftly to undo Trump's legacy, with aides readying about a dozen executive actions that Biden can take as soon as he is sworn into office that include rejoining the Paris climate agreement and ending Trump's ban on travel from predominantly Muslim countries. The President-elect plans to extend the moratorium on evictions and foreclosures for families affected by Covid-19 and to sign an order requiring masks on federal property and during interstate travel.  Inauguration Day looks different this year  Plans for the inauguration itself have been reshaped not only by the pandemic, but also by the stunning security breach at the US Capitol on January 6. There will be no crowds in the streets or on the National Mall as the city remains in lockdown.  Biden plans to lay a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, joined by former Presidents Barack Obama, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton, along with their spouses.  But in an empty and heavily guarded city, the rest of the traditional inaugural festivities will be geared toward an audience that will be livestreaming at home.  The inaugural parade down Pennsylvania Avenue to honor the incoming administration will be largely a virtual one. Biden and Harris will have a presidential escort from 15th Street to the White House including the US Army Band, a Joint Service Honor Guard and the commander in chief's Guard and Fife Drum Corps. And the drumlines from the University of Delaware and Howard University will join that event to honor the alma maters of the incoming president and vice president. The parade will be hosted by "Scandal" actor Tony Goldwyn and will feature comedian Jon Stewart, New Radicals and DJ Cassidy's "Pass the Mic" with performances by Earth Wind & Fire, Nile Rodgers, Kathy Sledge, The Trans Chorus of Los Angeles, The Washington Chorus and The Triumph Baptist Church Choir. Several Americans who sought to lift spirits of their neighbors in the midst of the pandemic will also take part, including Dr. Jason Campbell -- a Portland, Oregon, doctor who became known as the "TikToc Doc" with his uplifting dance performances in scrubs from the hospital -- and Jason Zgonc, a 12-year-old trumpeter from Atlanta who played during hospital workers' break times throughout the summer. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

2 Tight security at capitols across the country as Joe Biden is inaugurated
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_1b5d0e4aa4c59735813682c36c1668d2
(CNN) - The US Capitol in Washington, DC, and state capitols across the country are under tight security as President-elect Joe Biden was inaugurated on Wednesday. After a pro-Trump mob attacked the US Capitol two weeks ago, the FBI warned of possible armed protests at the Capitol and all 50 state capitols in the days leading up to and including inauguration. The warning has led to a massive security presence in DC. About 25,000 National Guard members are present and much of the area around the National Mall and Capitol are inaccessible to the public. Commercial flights at Washington Reagan National Airport were halted for about two hours leading up to Biden taking the oath of office, according to the Federal Aviation Administration. States, too, have bolstered their defenses by setting up fences and barriers, boarding up windows, and calling in the National Guard. So far, the large security efforts have dwarfed the protests that materialized. But the tensions remain high. On Sunday, small gatherings of protesters, some of whom were armed, stood outside capitols in Michigan, Ohio, Texas, and several others states, but many other state capitols that had prepared for the worst encountered just a handful of people. All of the protests were peaceful. The security efforts have even extended to vetting National Guard members arriving in Washington for the inauguration in case of an "insider threat." "While we have no intelligence indicating an insider threat, we are leaving no stone unturned in securing the capital," Acting Secretary of Defense Christopher Miller said Monday. Twelve Army National Guard members were removed from inauguration duty as part of the security vetting to ensure none of the troops have ties to extremist groups, the chief of the National Guard Bureau said Tuesday. Between the security concerns and the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, Biden's inauguration will be unlike any other in American history. Protests mostly quiet so far FBI Director Christopher Wray warned last week that the FBI has been seeing "extensive" chatter surrounding the inauguration.  "Together with our partners we evaluate those threats and what kind of resources to deploy against them. Right now we're tracking calls for potential armed protest," he said. Since then, there have been a few armed protesters at state capitols, but those that occurred have been relatively small and with varying political views. In Richmond, Virginia, for example, several armed demonstrators who gathered on Monday identified themselves as members of the Proud Boys and Boogaloo groups as well as the Black Panthers. Outside Oregon's capitol in Salem, five armed people dressed in camouflage said they were anti-government libertarians who supported neither Trump nor Biden. The heavy security and ongoing arrests of people who participated in the storming of the US Capitol may be playing a role in discouraging the protests. Anti-government groups that vowed to show up in the days before the inauguration appear to have been spooked in part by their own conspiracies that the government was behind some of the nationwide protests that have so far fizzled. Law enforcement officials say there is a broad surveillance net focused on people in the groups who participated in the Capitol attack. One of the prominent themes emerging is that the very anti-government conspiracies that drive groups like the Oath Keepers and other militants has become a driver to avoid the protests, fearing that they were being set up for arrest. Some of the people most likely to attend these types of events are also trying to lower their profile after participating in the insurrection, law enforcement officials said. Some have seen their faces in FBI posters circulated in the past week. In some cases, members of the groups have turned themselves in, hoping to gain some benefit from not waiting for the FBI come find them. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

3 Biden calls for racial justice in inaugural speech as civil rights leaders demand action
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_b519c3338b80183c85352942b3922496
(CNN) - When President-elect Joe Biden delivers his inauguration speech Wednesday, civil rights leaders are hoping for more than just promises, but a plan of action for racial healing.  Biden will be entering the presidency at a time when the nation is divided after White rioters stormed the US Capitol on Jan. 6 in their refusal to accept President Donald Trump's loss, and Black Lives Matter protests last summer sparked a national reckoning on racism. The frustrations on both sides of this political divide have been exacerbated by a Covid-19 pandemic that has killed people of color at higher rates and Trump's attempts to undermine the integrity of the election.  Now Black leaders say they are counting on Biden to unify the country and enact policies that address the disparities Black people face in housing, education, jobs, healthcare and voter suppression.  They also want Biden to undo the harm caused by the Trump with his offensive rhetoric toward people of color and refusal to address police brutality in the Black community.  "Racial equity requires more than individuals in positions. It requires a set of clear outcomes," NAACP President Derrick Johnson told CNN. Biden "has an obligation to reverse happened in the last for years. And it's very doable."  Johnson said he hopes that in Biden's inauguration speech he talks about his plan for addressing racial inequity in the country.  Biden, he said, needs to end economic insecurity in communities of color and the "predatory" police treatment of Black people, ensure equitable Covid-19 vaccine access and remove social media platforms that spread hate.  According to a CNN poll, 16% of Democrats believe that racial injustice is the most important problem facing the country right now while 65% say it is the coronavirus.  Conversely, only 1% of Republicans say racial injustice is most important issue with 32% choosing political divisions, 30% the economy, and 25% coronavirus.  The inauguration events this year have been themed "America United." Biden's speech is set to last about 20 minutes.  Some civil rights leaders say they are confident Biden will keep every promise he makes during his speech Wednesday.  Richard "Mouse" Smith, president of the Delaware NAACP and a lifelong friend of Biden's, said Biden earned the trust of Black people in Wilmington, Delaware, when he was a New Castle County Councilor in the early 1970s who wasn't afraid to go into the community and discuss their concerns.  "He brought love and respect and care for our community," Smith said. Wilmington's Black community was pleased with Biden's controversial Crime Bill of 1994 because it helped rid their neighborhoods of drugs, crime and slum houses, Smith said.  Smith said he believes Biden will lead the policy change that Black people need for equal education, jobs, environment justice and housing equity. "He has the ability to heal the country if people want the country to be healed," Smith said. "He can be a game changer and put evil and racism down."  Biden's inauguration is taking place two days after the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday which honors the legacy of the civil rights icon who died in 1968. King's son, Martin Luther King III, told CNN on Monday that he believes Biden and his administration should lead the country in bringing people together, address the Covid-19 pandemic, police brutality and misconduct as well as climate change.  "We're going to see a new air brought in," he said. "We will do better, we are much better than the behavior that we've seen exhibited over the last few days." Other Black activists also demanded a concrete plan from Biden.  The Rev. Michael W. Waters, a civil rights activist and author of "Something in the Water: A 21st Century Civil Rights Odyssey," called for a "purposeful redirecting of resources" to uplift marginalized and oppressed communities.  "Millions of people still voted for Donald Trump and real threats exist to our vision of democracy," Waters said. "Biden and Harris must embrace a radical platform of equity to redeem the soul of this nation."   © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

4 Biden was sworn in on a treasured 19th century family Bible
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_713adb7c9a563388d4ab2ecb83aeefe6
Washington  (CNN) - President Joe Biden was sworn in on a 19th century family Bible on Wednesday, continuing his longtime tradition of using the heirloom during his decades of public service. The five-inch thick Bible features a Celtic cross on the cover, and has been in the Biden family since 1893. The President has used the Bible each time he has taken an oath of office, including during his first Senate swearing-in in 1973 and his swearings-in as vice president in 2009 and 2013.  The Bible was also used by Biden's late son, Beau Biden, when he was sworn in as attorney general of Delaware in 2007. First Lady Jill Biden held the Bible on Wednesday as her husband took the oath of office, which was administered by Chief Justice John Roberts.  "Every important date is in there. For example, every time I've been sworn in for anything, the date has been on that, and it's inscribed on the Bible," Biden told Stephen Colbert in December.  "Our son, when he was sworn in as attorney general, all the important dates in our family, going way back. And it's just been a family heirloom," he said.  The Bible has been so central to Biden's political career that in 2009 when he took his final oath in the Senate, the swearing-in was delayed when the Bible couldn't be located, according to the Wilmington News Journal.  Kamala Harris' two Bibles Vice President Kamala Harris, meanwhile, also used notable Bibles when she was sworn in on Wednesday. She chose two Bibles -- one that belonged to former Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall, one of her heroes who inspired her to pursue a career in the law, and that of Regina Shelton, a neighbor who cared for Harris and her sister Maya when they were growing up.  Harris and her sister attended church with Shelton, where the Vice President was introduced to the teachings of the Bible. Harris has described Shelton as a "second mother to us." Second Gentleman Douglas Emhoff held those two Bibles on Wednesday as Harris took her oath, which was administered by Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

5 World leaders welcome Biden with praise, pleas, and parting shots at Trump
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_3745c6cd44817ed6dbd97bb8bc5e9f09
London  (CNN) - When Joe Biden is sworn in Wednesday as the 46th United States president, he will take the reins of a country in crisis. But his task on the global stage will be daunting too.   World leaders reacted to Biden's inauguration by offering congratulations, jockeying for position at the forefront of his foreign policy agenda, and in some cases pleading for the reversal of his predecessor's policies.  Among most messages was a palpable sense of relief, as the international community embraced Biden's pledge to reenter a series of global pacts and organizations that President Donald Trump cut loose. Here's what leaders have said so far.  European Union "Once again, after four long years, Europe has a friend in the White House," European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said on Wednesday, leaving no uncertainty about her verdict on Trump's relationship with the bloc. "This new dawn in America is the moment we've been waiting for so long. Europe is ready for a new start with our oldest and most trusted partner," she said in the European Parliament in Brussels, Belgium.   Von der Leyen said Biden's inauguration would "be a message of healing for a deeply divided nation and it will be a message of hope for a world that is waiting for the US to be back in the circle of like-minded states."  Biden has signaled a warmer partnership with Europe than Trump, who frequently criticized the EU on trade during his administration. His attacks on some European leaders led to frosty scenes at a number of summits.  "From our perspective, Trump saw Europe as an enemy," a senior European diplomat told CNN last week. "The lasting impact of 'America First' is the US having fewer friends in Europe." China Hours before the inauguration, Beijing expressed hope that Biden would "look at China rationally and objectively" to repair "serious damage" in bilateral ties caused by the Trump presidency. "In the past four years, the US administration has made fundamental mistakes in its strategic perception of China ... interfering in China's internal affairs, suppressing and smearing China, and causing serious damage to China-US relations," foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said at a press briefing Wednesday. The Biden administration should, Hua said, "look at China rationally and objectively, meet China halfway and, in the spirit of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit, push China-US relations back to the right track of healthy and stable development as soon as possible." One of the main planks of Trump's foreign policy platform has been his trade war with China. The Trump administration's 11th hour declaration that China is committing genocide against Uyghur Muslims will heighten tensions with Beijing, though Biden's nominee for Secretary of State said Tuesday that he agreed with the designation.   "If the new US administration can adopt a more rational and responsible attitude in formulating its foreign policy, I think it will be warmly welcomed by everyone in the international community," she added. Iran Iran's President Hassan Rouhani called on Biden to return to the 2015 nuclear deal and lift US sanctions on Iran, overturning a key part of Trump's foreign policy program. "The ball is in the US' court now. If Washington returns to Iran's 2015 nuclear deal, we will also fully respect our commitments under the pact," Rouhani said in a televised cabinet meeting. He also launched a scathing attack on the outgoing President. A "tyrant's era came to an end and today is the final day of his ominous reign," Rouhani said of Trump's departure. "Someone for whom all of his four years bore no fruit other than injustice and corruption and causing problems for his own people and the world." Biden has said he plans to return to the nuclear deal with Iran, which was signed during when he was Barack Obama's Vice President. Biden's national security aides have suggested they would like further negotiations on Iran's ballistic missile capabilities, though Rouhani has said the missile prograam is non-negotiable. Germany The German President said he was relieved that Biden would be sworn in Wednesday, calling it "a good day for democracy." "In the United States, (democracy) held up against a lot of pressure," Frank Walter Steinmeier said in a statement.  "Despite internal hostility, America's institutions have proven strong -- election workers, governors, judiciary, and Congress," he said. "I am relieved that Joe Biden is sworn in as President today and coming into the White House. I know that this feeling is shared by many people in Germany.  Steinmeier also warned against the populist brand of politics that Trump embraced. "Despite all the joy we have about today, we must not forget that populism has seduced even the most powerful democracy in the world," he said. "We must resolutely oppose polarization, protect and strengthen the public space of our democracies, and shape politics on the basis of reason and facts." United Kingdom British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said he was looking forward to a close relationship with Biden's administration. "In our fight against Covid and across climate change, defence, security and in promoting and defending democracy, our goals are the same and our nations will work hand in hand to achieve them," Johnson said in a statement Tuesday.  Johnson warmly welcomed Trump on his visits to the UK, with Trump once claiming that the Prime Minister was nicknamed "Britain Trump." But the outgoing US leader was unpopular among Brits, and Johnson will be keen to secure a post-Brexit trade deal with Biden. The new President could end up making two trips to the UK in 2021, with Johnson saying he looks forward to welcoming him to the G7 summit and to the hotly anticipated 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, Scotland. "Only through international cooperation can we truly overcome the shared challenges which we face," Johnson said on Tuesday. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

6 Biden becomes @POTUS: How the social media transition of power unfolded
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_402c360beb6e107222ea918cadc4ae9f
New York  (CNN Business) - As Joe Biden was sworn in as the president of the United States, another transition of power took place on social media.  On Wednesday, Biden and his team gained access to a long list of official government accounts across the major social media platforms, including the @POTUS account on Twitter. With the tap of a button, the Biden administration inherited a digital megaphone with the potential to make news and shape the public image of the US government. The transfer of these official accounts, which include not just those representing Biden and the White House but nearly every arm of government, has emerged as an important aspect of the broader transition of power, especially after Twitter became the favored online platform of former President Donald Trump. "It certainly has a big symbolic value," said David Lazer, a political science and computer sciences professor at Northeastern University. "The centrality of Twitter to Trump's brand and identity has made the moment a lot more significant." Trump used his personal Twitter account, @realdonaldtrump, to make major policy announcements, fire staffers, attack critics and spread misinformation. His account was permanently suspended earlier this month following the deadly insurrection at the Capitol. In addition to the @POTUS account, which was created during the Obama administration, Twitter transferred @WhiteHouse, @VP, @FLOTUS, and @PressSec to the new administration. Twitter also created a new account, @SecondGentleman, for Vice President-Elect Kamala Harris' husband Doug Emhoff.  It marks only the second such transition between US presidential administrations for Twitter, which launched in 2006. But unlike the transition four years ago, the Biden administration didn't inherit the tens of millions of followers on each account. Instead, people on Twitter who previously followed official White House Twitter accounts or who currently follow "relevant" Biden or Harris Twitter accounts, are receiving in-app alerts and other notifications about the archival process and the option to follow the new accounts, the company said in a blog post.  The decision prompted criticism from the Biden camp, which said it "unnecessarily politicizes what otherwise should be a routine transfer of communication from one administration to the next." As of Tuesday night, the @POTUS account had about 33 million followers, while the @FLOTUS and @VP accounts had 16 million and 10 million, respectively.  Twitter's approach stands in contrast to other social networks such as Snapchat and YouTube, which said the Biden administration would keep the current followers on the respective White House accounts.  Facebook and its subsidiary Instagram transferred accounts on both platforms, such as the POTUS and FLOTUS Facebook pages and the White House Instagram account, to Biden's team. These platforms also duplicated the followers on Joe Biden's Facebook page and Instagram account to the official POTUS page and account.  While the Biden team may not inherit all of the Twitter followers, it won't be starting totally from scratch. Biden's @Transition46 account on Twitter became @WhiteHouse, the @PresElectBiden became @POTUS, @SenKamalaHarris became @VP, @FLOTUSBiden became @FLOTUS, and @PressSecPsaki became @PressSec. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

7 There was one winning ticket in $730 million Powerball lottery
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_8fa06532bdc3fd8afd555405ffded49b
(CNN) - There is a single winner of the Powerball lottery on Wednesday. "A single ticket sold in Maryland matched all six numbers in the Wednesday night Powerball drawing to win the fourth-largest jackpot in Powerball history," according to an early Thursday morning release from Powerball. The winning numbers were: 40, 53, 60, 68, 69, plus Powerball 22, and Power Play multiplier 3X. "The lucky ticket holder will have the choice between an estimated annuity of $731.1 million, paid in 30 graduated payments over 29 years, or a lump sum payment of $546.8 million. Both prize options are before taxes," the news release said.   This is only the fourth time the jackpot has crossed the $700 million mark, according to Powerball. The Mega Millions jackpot is still in play.  No winners on Tuesday means Friday's winner could potentially win an estimated $970 million. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

8 Biden pushes to reopen schools within 100 days
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_28878638ae6d58c2a8df1190337921b7
Washington  (CNN) - President Joe Biden is pledging to reopen most K-12 schools within 100 days -- an ambitious goal as Covid cases surge and teachers across the country fight some plans to reopen. Teachers' union leaders say they are pleased with Biden's sense of urgency and focus, but they warn that the 100-day pledge may need to be a goal rather than a fixed target.  Biden is expected to sign several executive actions Thursday, his second day in office, to help support the reopening goal and establish a national strategy to get the coronavirus under control, but the measures stop short of requiring schools to reopen within any set time frame.  One executive order will direct the Departments of Education and Health and Human Services to provide reopening guidance to schools with a focus on masking, testing and cleaning. A separate presidential memorandum will offer reimbursement to schools for purchases of personal protective equipment through the Federal Emergency Management Agency's disaster relief fund.  Biden's reopening policy is in stark contrast to former President Donald Trump's threats to withhold federal relief funding from schools if they didn't reopen for in-person learning, which neither Trump nor Congress ever put into action. On a call with reporters Wednesday, Carole Johnson, Biden's Covid testing coordinator, acknowledged that the reopening timeline may need to be extended. "The health and safety of students, educators, staff and families is paramount. The administration will always be honest about the challenges we face, including addressing how and whether changes in the pandemic may impact the reopening of schools or the ability of schools to reopen," Johnson said.   Union leaders question 100-day time frame While many districts across the country are open, about half of K-12 students are currently attending virtual-only schools. Teachers have resisted reopening plans in major cities like Washington and Chicago.  Union heads describe having a close working relationship with the Biden team but argue that the 100-day goal is a big challenge.  American Federation of Teachers President Randi Weingarten says the goal may need to be reassessed depending on how the coronavirus is spreading over the next few months. Experts have warned that more transmissible variants, including the one first seen in the UK, could send cases surging again.  "I'm on board with the goal, but I'm very concerned about this new variant. None of this is done in isolation," Weingarten said.  National Education Association President Becky Pringle said the 100-day pledge sends a strong message that reopening schools is a top priority for Biden but that it's "not about the days, it's about the urgency he's putting on the issue." "It's an aggressive plan, no question," Pringle added, noting there's "nothing educators want to do more than be back in person safely with their kids." Congress is urged to provide resources needed to reopen Teachers' unions and Democrats have long argued that the ability to open schools also depends on the resources available. Biden is pushing Congress to approve another $170 billion for K-12 schools, colleges and universities to help them operate safely in person or facilitate remote learning. Congress approved $82 billion in aid for schools in December, which Biden has said he views as a "down payment."   The new funding would be part of a broad $1.9 trillion relief package that would also include expanding unemployment benefits and direct stimulus checks. Congress, where Democrats now control both the House and the Senate, could take up the bill as early as next week. But it will take time for that money to make its way to school districts even if it's approved.  The American Federation of Teachers is calling for five specific things schools will need to reopen: tools like masks and cleaning supplies to mitigate the spread of the virus in buildings, testing and contract tracing, accommodations for at-risk teachers, quick vaccinations for teachers, and honesty and transparency about the guidance.  Bechara Choucair, Biden's pick to head vaccine coordination, said Wednesday that the administration will call on states to open up vaccine eligibility to teachers, along with first responders, grocery store workers and people over 65.   © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

9 An inauguration like no other: Notable moments of a momentous day
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_ac158f57dff673dc9a8f4caef302fc93
Washington  (CNN) - President Joe Biden's inauguration on Wednesday looked a bit different from past ceremonies ushering in a new administration. The day's historic events navigated heightened security measures in Washington, DC, Covid-19 precautions and the absence of the outgoing President, the first time that's happened in more than a century and a half. Still, the unprecedented day closed with fireworks and messages of unity and hope. Here are the  highlights from the inauguration of America's 46th president: Trump leaves the White House Though former President Donald Trump did not attend Biden's swearing-in ceremony, he was publicly seen several times, including when he left the White House as president for the last time shortly after 8 a.m. ET.  Before boarding Marine One with the former first lady, Trump told reporters at the White House it was a "great honor" to serve as 45th President of the United States before saying goodbye.  Trump speaks at Joint Base Andrews before heading to Florida  Trump also held a final farewell ceremony, where both he and former first lady Melania Trump delivered remarks.  The former President thanked his family and chief of staff, and promised to "always fight." He also wished the incoming Biden administration "great luck," though he didn't mention his successor by name. Melania Trump, meanwhile, told attendees that "being your first lady was my greatest honor." The two then boarded Air Force One for the last time just before 9 a.m., taking the presidential plane to their Florida home.  Biden attends church  Just after the Trumps boarded Air Force One, Biden and first lady Jill Biden headed over to Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle in DC, where they attended mass with their family, Vice President Kamala Harris and her family. They were joined by the congressional leaders of both parties. Incoming presidents typically attend services on the morning of their inauguration, often at St. John's Episcopal Church, a small church across Lafayette Square from the White House known as "The Church of the Presidents."  Biden arrives at Capitol Biden arrived at the US Capitol shortly after 11 a.m. and Harris and her husband, Doug Emhoff, accompanied him and Jill Biden up the steps of the iconic building.  When Biden arrived at the inauguration stage, he greeted his predecessor and former boss, former President Barack Obama, on his way to his seat. He received a lengthy ovation from those gathered on the stage and sat down at 11:19 a.m.  Harris and Obama first bump As she walked to her seat on the inaugural stage, Harris shared double fist bumps with Obama. The gesture, exchanged shortly before Harris was sworn in as vice president, carried symbolic weight as Obama and Harris made history as the first African Americans to serve as president and vice president, respectively. Harris similarly fist bumped Michelle Obama, who made history as the country's first African American first lady. Harris is sworn in as vice president Harris took the oath of office at 11:42 a.m. She used two Bibles during the oath, which was administered by Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor.  Harris officially became the first female, first Black and first South Asian vice president at noon. Biden is sworn in as the 46th president Biden completed his oath of office at 11:48  a.m., using a treasured family Bible that dates to the 19th century and was held by Jill Biden. The oath was administered by Chief Justice John Roberts.  After being sworn in, Biden delivered an inaugural address in which he called for unity and pledged to be a "president for all Americans," including those who did not support his campaign at his inauguration address. The President also offered a forewarning his remarks, describing the nation as weathering a "winter of peril" amid the coronavirus pandemic. Singers and poet perform The inauguration also featured several celebrity performances, including a rendition of the National Anthem by Lady Gaga. Jennifer Lopez sang a medley of American musical selections including "This Land is your Land" and "America the Beautiful," and Garth Brooks performed "Amazing Grace."  Amanda Gorman, the nation's first-ever youth poet laureate, also delivered a poem in which she challenged Americans to "leave behind a country better than the one we were left" and unify. Pence and Harris share a laugh Former Vice President Mike Pence, who attended the ceremony even though Trump did not, was met with bipartisan applause when he and his wife, Karen Pence, walked out onto the inaugural stands earlier Wednesday. Later, as Harris and Emhoff bid the Pences farewell outside the Capitol, the two couples shared a laugh as the Pences began their private life. Biden signs first presidential documents Biden signed three documents after the ceremony outside the Capitol finished, including an Inauguration Day Proclamation, nominations to Cabinet positions and nominations to sub-Cabinet positions.   Biden and Harris receive congressional gifts The President and vice president also received congressional gifts, as is customary, including a painting by a Black painter from the Civil War presented to Biden by Sen. Roy Blunt, a Missouri Republican. Minnesota Democratic Sen. Amy Klobuchar presented Biden and Harris with Lenox crystal vases, while House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and now-Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell presented the President and vice president with American flags. Biden and Harris attend wreath-laying at Arlington Biden and Harris went from the Capitol to Arlington National Cemetery for a wreath-laying ceremony with three former presidents -- Obama, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton -- at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.  Biden walks in inaugural parade Biden and his family got out of the presidential motorcade to walk down the stretch of Pennsylvania Avenue outside the White House. The President stopped a few times to greet people along the route, including Washington Mayor Muriel Bowser and NBC's Al Roker.  The Bidens enter the White House Shortly before 4 p.m., Biden entered the White House for the first time as the 46th commander in chief. He and the first lady paused for a moment on the North Portico as "Hail to the Chief" played. They embraced, waved to cameras and walked alongside their extended family into the Grand Foyer to begin his presidency. Harris swears in new Democratic senators Harris returned to the Capitol to swear in three new Democratic senators: Georgia's Jon Ossoff and Raphael Warnock, and California's Alex Padilla, who replaced Harris in the chamber. Their swearing-in officially gave Democrats control of the Senate for the first time since they lost the chamber in 2014. Harris will wield power as the Senate's crucial tie-breaking vote. Harris laughed as she read a line referencing her own resignation from the Senate as part of the swearing-in. "The chair lays before the Senate two certificates of election and a certificate of appointment to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of former Sen. Kamala D. Harris of California," Harris said.  "Yeah, that was very weird." Biden takes aim at Trump's legacy with early executive actions  Biden got down to work in the White House later Wednesday, finalizing over a dozen executive moves by signing a flurry of executive orders, memorandums and directives to agencies.  "There's no time to start like today," Biden told reporters in the Oval Office as he began signing a stack of orders and memoranda. "I'm going to start by keeping the promises I made to the American people." Biden warns staffers he won't tolerate disrespect Biden warned new White House employees during a swearing-in ceremony that he would terminate them if he found them trashing one another. Making explicit that he wanted to break with the toxic environment that pervaded the West Wing during the previous administration, Biden said he wanted his staff governed by collegiality and respect. "If you're ever working with me and I hear you treating another colleague with disrespect, talking down to someone, I will fire you on the spot," he said. Press secretary vows to champion transparency and honesty White House press secretary Jen Psaki began her tenure by holding the administration's first press briefing Wednesday night and vowing to return to fact-based briefings. Psaki said that upon accepting the job, she was committed to "bringing truth and transparency back to the briefing room." She continued, "There will be times when we see things differently in this room, I mean among all of us. That's OK. That's part of our democracy, and rebuilding trust with the American people will be central to our focus in the press office and in the White House." Biden reiterates call for unity during 'Celebrating America' inauguration special Standing in front of the Lincoln Memorial, Biden reiterated his call for unity Wednesday evening during a speech at the primetime inauguration special "Celebrating America." "It is humbling to stand here in this place in front of these sacred words. Humbling out of respect to President Lincoln and the office we now share and humbling because of you, the American people," Biden said. "As I said earlier today, we have learned again that democracy is precious and because of you democracy has prevailed." The star-studded 90-minute program kicked off with Bruce Springsteen performing his song "Land of Hope and Dreams." The special, hosted by Tom Hanks, also features performances from Jon Bon Jovi -- who campaigned with Biden in Pennsylvania, John Legend, the Foo Fighters, Demi Lovato, Justin Timberlake and Ant Clemons.  Harris highlights 'American aspiration'  In her first remarks to the nation as vice president, Harris put emphasis on In her first remarks to the nation as vice president, Harris put an emphasis on American aspiration while speaking during the inauguration special.  "This moment embodies our character as a nation. It demonstrates who we are, even in dark times. We not only dream, we do. We not only see what has been, we see what can be. We shoot for the moon, and then we plant our flag on it," she said. "We are bold, fearless and ambitious. We are undaunted, in our belief that we shall overcome, that we will rise up. This is American aspiration." Presidents Obama, Bush and Clinton honor Biden as America's new leader  Former Presidents Barack Obama, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton honored Biden as America's new leader while echoing his message of unity. In a video message recorded Wednesday afternoon as part of the "Celebrating America" inauguration concert, the trio each wished Biden well as he steps into the White House. "I think the fact that the three of us are standing here talking about a peaceful transfer of power, speaks to the institutional integrity of our country," Bush said.  "America's a generous country, people of great hearts. All three of us were lucky to be the president of this country," Bush said, adding: "Mr. President, I'm pulling for your success. Your success is our country's success. God bless you." Obama delivered a similar message of unity, stating: "We have got to not just listen to folks we agree with, but listen to folks we don't." "One of my fondest memories of the inauguration was the grace and generosity that President Bush showed me, and Laura Bush showed Michelle," he said. Clinton, meanwhile, said the nation was "ready to march" with Biden. "You have spoken for us today. Now you will lead for us." Fireworks over the nation's capital An unprecedented day came to an end with stunning fireworks.  The President and first lady watched the celebratory display from the Blue Room Balcony above the White House South Lawn. The vice president and her husband watched from the Lincoln Memorial as singer Katy Perry performed her song "Firework." This story has been updated with additional developments Wednesday. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

10 DHS pauses some deportations for 100 days
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_bbd5a8e965c595e1430866e6c33a76d8
(CNN) - The Department of Homeland Security is pausing some deportations for 100 days, the department announced late Wednesday. The decision was made "to ensure we have a fair and effective immigration enforcement system focused on protecting national security, border security, and public safety," according to a news release. The department's news release said the pause, which President Joe Biden pledged to do, applies to "certain noncitizens" but doesn't provide more details. The pause begins Friday. This is a breaking story and will be updated.   © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

11 Inside Joe Biden's newly decorated Oval Office
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_4075af7fcec8afd18495b2b7d9f659c3
Washington  (CNN) - The press got its first glimpse of President Joe Biden's Oval Office on Wednesday, showing how in a matter of hours the office has visibly transformed in both dramatic and subtle ways to reflect the taste and politics of the officeholder.  Most keep an eye on what's happening inside the office -- what agreements are made, what policies are announced and which foreign dignitaries stop by. But with every inch of the space on display, US presidents, their families and their staffs also meticulously choose which pieces of art are installed, what furniture is hauled in, and even which tchotchkes are placed on shelves.   Here's how Biden has chosen to change the Oval Office.  Artwork A portrait of Andrew Jackson, to the left of the seat at the Resolute Desk, has been replaced with a portrait of Benjamin Franklin by Joseph Duplessis. Like other works routinely lent to the White House, the portrait appears to be on loan from the Smithsonian Institution's National Gallery of Art. Trump drew criticism in 2017 after holding an event in the Oval Office honoring Navajo veterans while standing in front of the portrait of Jackson -- the President who signed legislation that eventually led to the "Trail of Tears."  The Washington Post, which got a first look at the Oval's new interior decorations, reported that the Franklin portrait and a nearby moon rock set are meant to represent Biden's interest in science.  A bronze bust of labor leader Cesar Chavez was also placed on the credenza behind his desk.  Elizabeth Strater, spokeswoman for the United Farm Workers -- a group Chavez helped found -- told the Fresno Bee that the bust was previously on display in the Visitor Center of the Cesar E. Chavez National Monument in Keene, California. Strater told the publication that Biden's transition team worked with the Cesar Chavez Foundation to ship the piece.  Biden also prominently placed the White House collection painting "Avenue in the Rain" to the right of the seat at the Resolute Desk. The painting, rife for metaphors, was on display in the Oval under Trump, but switched out during his term.  Though not entirely visible to television cameras, the Post reported that "busts of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy flank a fireplace in the office." There are also busts of Rosa Parks, Eleanor Roosevelt and an Allan Houser sculpture depicting a horse and Chiricahua Apache rider. The sculpture, the Post said, once belonged to the late Sen. Daniel Inouye, a Democrat representing Hawaii.  The Post report says other parts of the office now feature paintings of George Washington, Abraham Lincoln and a bust of Daniel Webster, a former senator who defended the Union. A bust of Winston Churchill has also been removed from display.  On the Resolute Desk There were two sets of objects spotted on the Resolute Desk when Biden took office that definitely reflect a transition of power: a cup and saucer set, as well as a box of pens to sign the orders.  Trump was a Diet Coke drinker, who reportedly had a button in the Oval to summon someone to bring him soda. He was rarely photographed with a tea or coffee cup at his side.  Trump has also long loved using thick, black markers to sign his name on official government documents -- celebrity autograph style. He originally stuck to the traditional pens used by other presidents, but at some point, switched to the Sharpie-style markers, with his golden signature printed onto its barrel.   Interior decorating During the executive order signing on Wednesday, Biden was seated in a tufted, dark brown leather chair -- a switch from the thick, reddish brown executive seat Trump was last photographed sitting on inside the Oval Office. It was extremely similar, if not identical to the seat Trump used in his private office before becoming president.  The Bidens selected at least two Clinton-era furnishings to replace Trump's selections -- a blue Oval Office rug and darker gold curtains, according to the Post. Other items, which may look familiar, were chosen from the White House collection, the Post says.  Subtle changes Flags of the US' military branches, which Trump originally added to the decor of the room, have been removed.  Photographs behind the President typically displayed on a credenza were also switched out to feature Biden's family, including his late son, Beau. And Trump's Challenge Coin collection, often placed on the credenza, were gone as well.  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

12 CDC forecasts up to 100,000 more Covid-19 deaths in the next few weeks
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_0f570d98d38682ec4f0d908dcf8e06fc
(CNN) - The United States could face as many as 100,000 more Covid-19 deaths in less than a month, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The nation reported more than 4,000 Covid-19 deaths Wednesday, only the third day ever to cross that threshold, bringing the death toll to at least 406,001 people, according to the Johns Hopkins tracking data.  And by February 13, that number could reach 508,000, according to an ensemble forecast published by the CDC. The last forecast, on January 13, projected up to 477,000 deaths by February 6.   In the meantime, vaccines have begun to be distributed, but there remain significant challenges with the supply across the country, according to state officials. New CDC director Dr. Rochelle Walensky  on Wednesday described the toll of the pandemic as "truly heartbreaking" but that "healthier days lie ahead" -- although that getting there would require a rapid acceleration of testing, surveillance and vaccination. She said the agency will be conducting a review of all of its guidance regarding the pandemic, so "people can make decisions and take action based upon the best available evidence." To alleviate the financial burdens, the CDC will also extend a federal moratorium preventing the eviction of some people from their homes until March 31. Also on Wednesday, President Joe Biden announced the US will rejoin the World Health Organization. His administration will also continue to hold regular meetings with local health officials, said Lori Tremmel Freeman, CEO of the National Association of County and City Health Officials. "We still have a lot of spread and a lot of burden from that spread on our health care systems and a lot of death from the disease. We still have a lot of work to do," Freeman said. California deaths and severity of cases remain high Most coronavirus metrics have been improving in California, an epicenter of the virus in the US. But the severity of cases in the state and the death toll remain high. California added 22,403 new cases Wednesday, which is well below the average daily number for the state of 38,000.  But it also reported 694 new Covid-19-related deaths Wednesday, the second-highest single-day toll to date. The previous high of 708 was recorded nearly two weeks ago. In Los Angeles, the rate of death among hospitalized Covid-19 patients has nearly doubled in recent months.  Since November, hospitalized patients in Los Angeles County have had about a 23% chance of dying from the disease, health officials said Wednesday. That rate marks a significant increase from the prior three months when Covid-19 patients had an approximately 12% chance of dying, according to the county's Department of Health Services. Along with the fatality rate, the length of hospital stays for coronavirus in Los Angeles County jumped from about seven days between September and November to about nine and a half from November to January, suggesting the severity of illness in those hospitalized has jumped, LADHS said. "This trend does not mean the virus has become more virulent or that care in hospitals worsened during the surge," Health Services Director Christina Ghaly explained. "Rather, we believe these trends are because hospitals, facing capacity constraints in the setting of the surge, became more selective in determining which patients to admit.  "In other words, hospitals are discharging more of the lower-acuity patients home with oxygen. They are admitting only the most critically ill patients."  But with a limited supply of coronavirus vaccine, state epidemiologist Erica Pan said it may take four to five months to get all Californians over the age of 65 vaccinated.  'A constant pattern of basically running out' of vaccine doses The push to get people vaccinated has grown as officials race to distribute doses to meet their demand. As of Wednesday, more than 16.5 million doses have been administered in the US and nearly 2.2 million Americans are fully vaccinated, the CDC said. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said the state is administering about 65,000 doses a day -- a rate that will deplete its current supply in two or three days. "What's clear now is that we will be going from week to week and you will see a constant pattern of basically running out, waiting for the next week's allocation and then starting up again," Cuomo said.  The state will receive 250,400 doses next week, but Cuomo urged Biden to increase the supply to states immediately. "At this current rate of supply, it takes seven and a half months to get enough vaccine for the currently eligible population," Cuomo said.  In Missouri, Gov. Mike Parson said that the state is on pace with its vaccination plan, but that the National Guard will be activated to help administer it as the state expands eligibility to include first responders, emergency services and those in public health infrastructure. A mass vaccination team will be set up in each of the nine Highway Patrol regions in the state, he said, and they will be able to administer up to 2,500 doses a day. The early weeks of spring could see another boost in vaccinations, as the WHO is evaluating 15 vaccines it could list for emergency use, according to a new guidance document. "I call on all countries to work together in solidarity to ensure that within the first 100 days of this year, vaccination of health workers and older people is underway in all countries," WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

13 Biden's first Cabinet nominee confirmed
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_4c21dbacbc541d6bfbcb6561d737c70b
(CNN) - Sen. Tom Cotton is waiting for an answer from President Joe Biden's director of national intelligence nominee Avril Haines before he agrees to a speedy Senate confirmation vote, in what's likely to determine whether Haines' is confirmed by the Senate on Wednesday. Cotton has asked Haines to clarify an answer she gave Tuesday during her Senate Intelligence Committee confirmation hearing about the CIA's interrogation program during the George W. Bush administration before allowing her confirmation to move forward, a Senate GOP aide said. The aide said that Cotton was hopeful that he would receive a written response from Haines on Wednesday, known as a "question for the record," at which point he would lift his hold on Haines' nomination. But Cotton's hold means it's unclear whether Haines will get a Senate vote Wednesday. A Democratic Senate aide confirmed Cotton was the reason for a delay on Haines' confirmation. The hold from Cotton, even if temporary, underscores the difficulties Biden may have getting his Cabinet into place quickly, something that requires the cooperation of all 100 senators. Sen. Josh Hawley already said Tuesday he would block quick confirmation of Biden's DHS nominee Alejandro Mayorkas, over immigration policy. Until Haines is confirmed, the director of national intelligence role will be filled in an acting capacity by ODNI Chief Operating Officer Lora Shiao, a senior intelligence official told CNN.  Shiao served as COO under President Donald Trump's DNI John Ratcliffe, who has left the job as expected.  Haines, testified before the Senate Intelligence Committee on Tuesday. Republican Sen. Marco Rubio, who is the panel's acting chairman until Democrats take control of the Senate Wednesday afternoon, said Wednesday that he did not attend Biden's inauguration ceremony because he was working on Haines' confirmation.  At CIA, Biden's pick for deputy director, David Cohen, will serve as acting director until the permanent nominee is confirmed. Biden's pick for CIA director is former diplomat William Burns.  The GOP aide said Cotton was concerned with Haines' response to a question from Oregon Democratic Sen. Ron Wyden about accountability inside the CIA over the Bush-era interrogation program that included the use of harsh tactics like waterboarding. Following a review of the Senate Intelligence Committee's "torture report" in 2013, Wyden noted that the CIA recommended broadening accountability reviews to include "systemic failures in accountability for individuals who were responsible for the failures."  "Do you agree with this recommendation, and if you are confirmed would you seek to apply it to the intelligence community?" Wyden asked. "Yes, senator, I agree with the 2013 recommendation that the Central Intelligence Agency indicated and to broaden the approach of accountability review boards that the report identified," Haines responded. Cotton asked Haines to clarify her answer during the Senate Intelligence Committee's closed session following the open hearing Tuesday. He asked her to respond in writing, and submitted the question to Haines following the closed session, the aide said. "During the subsequent closed session, you clarified that, if confirmed, any changes to the structure of accountability review boards or other administrative procedures would be forward looking, and that you would not re-litigate the conclusion of the CIA review into the rendition program or the Obama Administration's closure of related investigations," Cotton asked Haines in a written question. "Can you confirm that you will not reinvigorate efforts to prosecute, take administrative action against, or prejudice in any future promotion or selection panels any CIA officer involved with that program under DOJ guidance and Presidential direction?" © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

14 Divisive policies and actions from Trump-era that Biden could decide to alter
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_7c0502232e815f966c19e53fe989790a
(CNN) - President Joe Biden assumed the office intent on healing a deeply fractured country and reversing former President Donald Trump's divisive legacy.   "A cry for survival comes from the planet itself. A cry that can't be any more desperate or any more clear, and now arise political extremism, White supremacy, domestic terrorism that we must confront and we will defeat," Biden said during his inaugural speech on Wednesday. For the past four years, the Trump administration embraced policies and initiatives targeting immigrants and undermining the nation's progress on civil rights. All while the President's own words incited violence and bigotry.   Contrary to his predecessor's anti-immigration rhetoric, Biden unveiled a comprehensive plan right away that included a multi-year pathway to citizenship for the millions of undocumented immigrants currently in the United States. On his first day in office, nine of the 17 actions he took directly reverse Trump's policies. Here's a look at some of the Trump-era policies and actions involving immigration, equality and bigotry that Biden is planning to tackle or that he could decide to alter:   The assault on immigration Immigrant family separations: The Trump administration announced on April 6, 2017, a "zero tolerance" policy of prosecuting all immigrants who illegally cross the border. It led to the separation of thousands of families, including those with infants, some only a few months old, because children can't be kept in federal jail with their parents. It sparked protests in the streets and eventually prompted a rare reversal from the President himself. The policy ended in 2018 but officials are still scrambling to fix the problems it caused. Last year, lawyers said they haven't been able to reach the parents of 545 children from separated families -- and that hundreds of those parents were likely deported without their children. One of Biden's executive actions undoes Trump's expansion of immigration enforcement within the US. "Remain in Mexico" policy and the border wall: Migrants have faced insurmountable challenges to claiming asylum and have been required to stay in Mexico in deplorable conditions, waiting for immigration hearings in the US under the Trump administration's so-called "remain in Mexico" policy. The policy, officially known as Migrant Protection Protocols, was implemented in 2019 amid an increase in migrant arrivals at the southern border, with officials arguing that it would deter migrants from making the journey north. Nearly 55,000 migrants, many of whom are from Central America, have been sent back to Mexico, where they have been left to wait for weeks, if not months, in regions deemed dangerous by the US State Department.  In another effort to seal the US off from immigrants and refugees, the Trump administration spent billions on building a border wall.  The Trump administration took a series of steps to erect additional barriers along the southern border, including declaring a national emergency to access additional funds, filing dozens of lawsuits to acquire private land, and waiving environmental and contracting laws to expedite construction. On Wednesday, Biden's order halted the construction of the border wall by terminating the national emergency declaration used to fund it. Trump sought to cancel DACA:  The Obama-era program shielding undocumented immigrants who came to the US as children from deportation was under legal and political siege. The Trump administration tried ending the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program in 2017 but the US Supreme Court blocked its attempt last summer.  A federal judge ordered authorities to fully restore the program in December, allowing newly eligible immigrants to file new applications.  Trump also spent years limiting the number of refugees coming into the country. For the current fiscal year, his administration set the lowest cap the US has seen in decades. Citing the pandemic, the Trump administration enacted what critics described as unnecessary immigration restrictions, including new rules for international students, and blocked thousands of guest worker visas. During his first day in office, Biden fortified DACA. Travel ban on predominantly Muslim countries: In one of his first moves in office, Trump signed the first travel ban, which caused chaos at airports and eventually landed at the Supreme Court. The policy has been derided by critics as an attempt to ban Muslims from the US. In 2018, the Supreme Court upheld the third version of the travel ban after the previous iterations were challenged in court. The current policy restricts entry from 13 countries to varying degrees, including Iran, Libya, Somalia, Syria and Yemen, along with Venezuela and North Korea.  The administration has argued that the travel ban was vital for national security and ensures countries meet US security needs, by requiring a certain level of identity management and information-sharing requirements. On Wednesday, Biden reversed the Trump administration's restrictions on passport holders from seven Muslim-majority countries. Pushback against racial justice advocacy  Trump blasted NFL players protesting: Athletes took a knee, raised a fist or didn't take to the field while the National Anthem was played before games across the country to draw attention to systematic bias against people of color. Their actions infuriated Trump. He railed against the players, saying they were outraged about "something that most of them are unable to define" and reiterated his belief that players who don't stand for the National Anthem should be penalized. The protests began in 2016 when Colin Kaepernick, then a quarterback for the San Francisco 49ers, sat and then knelt before several preseason and regular-season games. He said he did so to protest police shootings of African American men and other social injustices faced by Black people in the United States. Last year, Trump called the "Black Lives Matter" movement a "symbol of hate" and described people demonstrating for racial justice as "thugs." Department of Justice all but abandoned broad police investigations: Former Justice Department lawyers told CNN the wide-ranging investigations and consent decrees that had defined the Obama administration's approach to police misconduct all but disappeared under Trump. Former US Attorney Jeff Sessions spoke against consent decrees and police investigations, arguing that the cases can lower police morale.  Before Sessions left the department in November 2018, he put in place a memo that required consent agreements to be "narrowly tailored" to the injuries caused by misconduct and limited the use of court monitors, among other stipulations. Trump banned anti-discrimination workplace training: Federal agencies were directed to identify and cancel contracts and agency spending related to training programs that suggest the US "is an inherently racist or evil country" or "that any race or ethnicity is inherently racist or evil." Trump consistently sided against efforts to reckon with America's fraught racial past and claimed some of those efforts amount to an erasure of history.  A rule meant to combat housing segregation: The Trump administration ended the Obama-era rule known as Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing in 2020.  The rule was enacted in 2015 as a way to bolster the 1968 Fair Housing Act, which outlawed restrictions on selling or renting homes to people based on race. In 1973, Trump and his father were accused in a federal civil rights case of violating those restrictions. The case was eventually settled after Trump attempted to counter-sue. Despite the Fair Housing Act being in effect for decades, many neighborhoods remained segregated, with communities of color less likely to have access to good schools, health care and public programs necessary to help citizens rise out of poverty. The Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing rule was considered essential to further level the playing field for underprivileged populations. Political rhetoric linked to violence   White supremacist rally in Charlottesville: Trump's handling of the 2017 deadly White supremacist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, was widely criticized and seen as dismissive. In a news conference, Trump blamed the violence on both sides of the conflict. He also took days to publicly acknowledge the death of 32-year-old Heather Heyer, who was killed while protesting the White supremacists and neo-Nazis.   The President's top economic adviser, Gary Cohn, considered quitting and the corporate titans who composed his business advisory council stepped down but the controversy appeared to have had few long-term consequences within the White House.  Mass shootings in El Paso, Texas, and the Tree of Life synagogue: Many Latinos and immigrants said they were living in fear after a gunman opened fire at a Walmart store in El Paso, Texas, on August 3, 2019, killing 23 people. The shooting was allegedly carried out by a suspect who published a four-page document filled with White supremacist language and racist hatred aimed at immigrants and Latinos, including some phrases Trump had uttered in the past. In a national address days after the shooting, Trump called on the nation to condemn racism and White supremacy. But he stopped short of acknowledging his own divisive and racist rhetoric. A year before, a gunman killed 11 worshipers at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh, an incident considered the deadliest attack ever on Jews in the US. Federal prosecutors filed hate crime charges against the suspect, who previously claimed Jews were helping transport members of migrant caravans from Central America.  The Trump administration described the group of migrants as a national security threat.  While Trump denounced the Pittsburgh shooting, the massacre widened a national debate over the President's divisive rhetoric. Some people, including a local rabbi, said the President's hateful speech had led to the massacre.   The US Capitol insurrection: Convinced that the presidential election had been stolen, Trump-supporting rioters touted themselves as "patriots" and repeatedly chanted "USA, USA" while vandalizing the building at the heart of America's democracy on January 6, the day Congress was meeting to finalize Biden's Electoral College victory. Hours before the insurrection, Trump had addressed a crowd of supporters gathered on the Ellipse near the White House, fanning false allegations of voter fraud and telling them to "fight like hell."  "We're going to walk down to the Capitol. And we're gonna cheer on our brave senators and congressmen and women. And we're probably not going to be cheering, so much for some of them, because you'll never take back our country with weakness, you have to show strength and you have to be strong," he said. Trump was impeached for a second time because of his role inciting the insurrection.  Biden called for racial justice and unity in America on Wednesday, acknowledging that the nation has been deeply divided by political forces and systemic racism. In his inaugural speech, Biden denounced White supremacy and domestic terrorism and said the nation needs to be repaired and healed. "To overcome these challenges, to restore the soul and secure the future America requires so much more than words. It requires the most elusive of all things in a democracy: Unity. Unity," Biden said, speaking from the same platform that had been stormed by armed insurrectionists two weeks ago. He acknowledged that speaking of unity can sound foolish these days, but the struggles the nation faces are not new. "I know the forces that divide us are deep and they are real. But I also know our history has been a constant struggle between the American ideal that we all are created equal and the harsh ugly reality of racism, nativism, fear, demonization have long torn us apart," he said, before adding that the better angels of the nation have always prevailed. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

15 Amanda Gorman calls on Americans to 'leave behind a country better than the one we were left' in powerful inauguration poem
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_95bc3a0469d304e9396c14845253b6c2
Washington  (CNN) - Amanda Gorman, the nation's first-ever youth poet laureate, called for Americans Wednesday to "leave behind a country better than the one we were left" and unify together as she spoke at President Joe Biden's inauguration. "Somehow we've weathered and witnessed a nation that isn't broken, but simply unfinished. We, the successors of a country and a time where a skinny Black girl descended from slaves and raised by a single mother can dream of becoming President, only to find herself reciting for one," Gorman, 22, said.  Nodding to the deadly insurrection at the US capitol earlier this month, Gorman said, "We've seen a force that would shatter our nation rather than share it." "Would destroy our country if it meant delaying democracy. And this effort very nearly succeeded. But while democracy can be periodically delayed, it can never be permanently defeated," she said. Gorman previously told CNN that she drew inspiration for the poem from the two poems read at Barack Obama's inauguration -- Richard Blanco's 2013 "One Today" and Elizabeth Alexander's 2009 "Praise Song for the Day" -- and writers, like Walt Whitman and Frederick Douglass, whom she feels have spoken to the ideals of a nation. She has recited her poetry at the Library of Congress, Boston's Symphony Hall, the Empire State Building's observation deck and all across the country, performing for such luminaries as Hillary Clinton, Al Gore and Lin-Manuel Miranda. This story is breaking and will be updated. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

16 READ: Youth poet laureate Amanda Gorman's inaugural poem
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_cae69058f48e6e4ce8438472c3f09eb3
(CNN) - Amanda Gorman, the nation's first-ever youth poet laureate, read the following poem during the inauguration of President Joe Biden on January 20: When day comes we ask ourselves, where can we find light in this never-ending shade? The loss we carry, a sea we must wade We've braved the belly of the beast We've learned that quiet isn't always peace And the norms and notions of what just is Isn't always just-ice And yet the dawn is ours before we knew it Somehow we do it Somehow we've weathered and witnessed a nation that isn't broken but simply unfinished We the successors of a country and a time Where a skinny Black girl descended from slaves and raised by a single mother can dream of becoming president only to find herself reciting for one And yes we are far from polished far from pristine but that doesn't mean we are striving to form a union that is perfect We are striving to forge a union with purpose To compose a country committed to all cultures, colors, characters and conditions of man And so we lift our gazes not to what stands between us but what stands before us We close the divide because we know, to put our future first, we must first put our differences aside We lay down our arms so we can reach out our arms to one another We seek harm to none and harmony for all Let the globe, if nothing else, say this is true: That even as we grieved, we grew That even as we hurt, we hoped That even as we tired, we tried That we'll forever be tied together, victorious Not because we will never again know defeat but because we will never again sow division Scripture tells us to envision that everyone shall sit under their own vine and fig tree And no one shall make them afraid If we're to live up to our own time Then victory won't lie in the blade But in all the bridges we've made That is the promise to glade The hill we climb If only we dare It's because being American is more than a pride we inherit, it's the past we step into and how we repair it We've seen a force that would shatter our nation rather than share it Would destroy our country if it meant delaying democracy And this effort very nearly succeeded But while democracy can be periodically delayed it can never be permanently defeated In this truth in this faith we trust For while we have our eyes on the future history has its eyes on us This is the era of just redemption We feared at its inception We did not feel prepared to be the heirs of such a terrifying hour but within it we found the power to author a new chapter To offer hope and laughter to ourselves So while once we asked, how could we possibly prevail over catastrophe? Now we assert How could catastrophe possibly prevail over us? We will not march back to what was but move to what shall be A country that is bruised but whole, benevolent but bold, fierce and free We will not be turned around or interrupted by intimidation because we know our inaction and inertia will be the inheritance of the next generation Our blunders become their burdens But one thing is certain: If we merge mercy with might, and might with right, then love becomes our legacy and change our children's birthright So let us leave behind a country better than the one we were left with Every breath from my bronze-pounded chest, we will raise this wounded world into a wondrous one We will rise from the gold-limbed hills of the west, we will rise from the windswept northeast where our forefathers first realized revolution We will rise from the lake-rimmed cities of the midwestern states, we will rise from the sunbaked south We will rebuild, reconcile and recover and every known nook of our nation and every corner called our country, our people diverse and beautiful will emerge, battered and beautiful When day comes we step out of the shade, aflame and unafraid The new dawn blooms as we free it For there is always light, if only we're brave enough to see it If only we're brave enough to be it © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

17 Youth poet laureate Amanda Gorman's jewelry carried powerful significance
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_4503d81085efa3de9de9b91243a46ef5
(CNN) - Lady Gaga and Jennifer Lopez may have been the headline acts of President Joe Biden's inauguration, but it was 22-year-old Amanda Gorman, the first national youth poet laureate, who delivered the event's true standout performance.  Gorman, who became the youngest poet to read at an inauguration ceremony, moved dignitaries in attendance and viewers at home with her reading "The Hill We Climb," her powerful poem calling for togetherness as America enters a new chapter. But she also caused a buzz with her vibrant outfit, which channeled the optimism of the occasion, and the jewelry she wore, though small on television screens, carried touching personal sentiment. In a yellow double-breasted coat from the Italian designer Miuccia Prada, complemented by a red satin Prada headband perched on top of her twisted hair style, the Los Angeles native stood out against the more muted crowd behind her. Speaking to Vogue, Gorman revealed that her choice of coat was a nod to First Lady Jill Biden, who asked her to speak at the inauguration, and praised Gorman's decision to wear yellow on another occasion. Her jewelry, notably, was not Prada, but rather gifts from independent designers, courtesy of Oprah Winfrey herself. Professing to be a fan of Gorman's work, Winfrey gifted Gorman a ring in the shape of a caged bird from New York-based brand Of Rare Origin (a tribute to African American poet Maya Angelou) and a pair of gold hoop earrings from Greek designer Nikos Koulis.  Winfrey was carrying on her own tradition with these gifts: In 1993, the talk show host and producer sent Angelou a Chanel coat and gloves ahead of her own reading at President Bill Clinton's inauguration.  While this is Gorman's most high-profile fashion moment to date, she likely has many more in her future, as her star continues to rise. "(Fashion) has so much meaning to me, and it's my way to lean into the history that came before me and all the people supporting me," she told Vogue.  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

18 The powerful duality of Kamala Harris' ascent
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_aa62652961095c65404003b651ea725b
Washington  (CNN) - Two weeks after a deadly insurrection put on display the White outrage that threatens the country's multiracial democracy, a dramatically different scene unfolded at the US Capitol. On January 20, Joe Biden and Kamala Harris were sworn into office. The inauguration of the first female, first Black and first South Asian vice president following the aforementioned assault did two things at once -- marked a hopeful turning point in the long fight for racial representation and justice, and underscored in sobering fashion that confronting White supremacy will be one of the new administration's main challenges. Harris' political rise even just over the past one and a half years is nothing to scoff at. Maybe most obviously, the former California senator's ascent to the vice presidency will change the face of power in a literal way. There was no shortage of coverage of how the 2020 Democratic primary field, which Harris was a part of, began as one of the most noteworthy in history. More specifically, the diversity of the slate of candidates who vied for the nomination was unprecedented: Latino, Asian, Black, gay, female. In December 2019, though, Harris suspended her campaign, as the field gradually congealed around straightness and Whiteness and maleness. It was no small thing, then, when Biden chose Harris as his running mate in August. "It just feels like Black girls like me can run for class president. Black girls like me can go for the big things in life like she did," Paris Bond, a teenager, told CNN that month. Or as Harris' late mother used to say to her barrier-busting daughter: "Kamala, you may be the first to do many things, but make sure you're not the last." Just as moving: when the Democratic duo trounced Trump in the November general election. Propelled by a multiracial coalition, Biden and Harris not only thwarted the reelection campaign of a man who used his Whiteness as a weapon -- they also ended the perverse pageantry of an administration that embraced virulent masculinity. But as vice president, Harris will be able to offer more than symbolic representation. "Joe Biden's vice president will most likely be the most powerful vice president in history because the trend is toward more powerful vice presidents. Joe Biden knows the value of having a vice president with lots of responsibility, and Joe Biden is going to inherit an epic disaster," as former Barack Obama senior adviser Dan Pfeiffer said last year, referring to the nightmarish toll of the novel coronavirus pandemic. Already, Harris has indicated how she'll battle the once-in-a-century crisis and its attendant racial disparities -- disparities that are the result of a history of discriminatory policy. Last May, she introduced the Covid-19 Racial and Ethnic Disparities Task Force Act to "bring together healthcare and other policy experts, community-based organizations, and federal, state, local, tribal and territorial leaders to confront the racial and ethnic disparities of this pandemic head on." In December, Biden selected Marcella Nunez-Smith, an associate professor of internal medicine, public health and management at Yale University, to lead the health equity task force. "Health care free of racism and discrimination is a right and not a privilege," Nunez-Smith said during a web briefing last month. "It is time for us to respond to the crisis of discrimination in health care." In other words, Harris will change what power looks like and directly influence whom it serves. But even with those triumphal dimensions, the new administration, from the very beginning, will have to navigate the resurgent currents of White supremacy. In an interview with NPR last week, Harris didn't mince her words in her condemnation of the recent attack on the Capitol. "It was the same thing that went through my mind when I saw Charlottesville," she said. "It's the same thing that went through my mind when I saw a picture of Emmett Till. It is not the first time I have seen a demonstration like what you are describing in the history of our country." That Harris drew parallels between the horror of the Trump years and the brutality of decades past made sense. The seizure of the Capitol was a gruesome reminder that White supremacy has always been tightly stitched into the American fabric. Indeed, historians have noted how the takeover echoed the Reconstruction period in terms of White backlash to racial equality. For instance, in 1873, more than 150 armed White men -- most affiliated with the Ku Klux Klan -- murdered between 60 and 150 members of a Black militia that had been defending the Grant Parish courthouse in Colfax, Louisiana, following the state's bitterly contested 1872 gubernatorial election. "The bloodiest single instance of racial carnage in the Reconstruction era, the Colfax massacre taught many lessons, including the lengths to which some opponents of Reconstruction would go to regain their accustomed authority," the Columbia University professor Eric Foner explains in his 1988 book, "Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863-1877." Accustomed authority. More than one and a half centuries after the end of the Civil War, the US has yet to deal fully with the enduring threat of White entitlement to political control, as evidenced by the Confederate flag-waving mob's assault on the Capitol. "We still have a lot of work to do," Harris said in the interview. There might be a consoling prospect to the carnage earlier this month, however. The attack could provide Biden and Harris with the political momentum necessary to act more vigorously than some of their Democratic antecedents -- to banish White supremacist groups and clamp down on the corruption and racism that afflict police departments, Ronald Brownstein argued last week. Often, the US assumes itself to be better than it is, particularly when it comes to nourishing racial progress. The new administration will have the opportunity to narrow the distance between that assumption and reality. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

19 Kamala Harris was escorted to the ceremony by the Capitol Police officer who led rioters away from Senate
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_b0d6c24aab24a03ef3918a9b1649e716
(CNN) - Eugene Goodman has been hailed as a hero ever since he lured rioters away from the Senate chambers during the January 6 insurrection on Capitol Hill. The Capitol Police officer's courageous actions were recognized again on Wednesday when he escorted Kamala Harris to the inauguration ceremony. He was there in his new role as acting deputy House sergeant at arms, CNN's Jeff Zeleny reported. Goodman became the face of resistance to the insurrection when shortly after the Capitol Hill attack, video showed him leading a mob of Trump supporters in the opposite direction of the Senate chambers. At the time, lawmakers were still debating an objection to Arizona's Electoral College vote count. In footage captured by Huffington Post reporter Igor Bobic, Goodman could be seen being chased up a Capitol staircase by the mob. When he reached a landing, he looked to his left, where he noticed the door to the Senate chambers was still unguarded. He then led the rioters to the right, away from lawmakers and toward backup officers. The Senate chambers wouldn't be secured until one minute later, according to CNN's timeline of events from the riot. Once Goodman led the rioters into a larger hall, backup officers arrived, though they were still outnumbered by rioters. A bipartisan trio of lawmakers introduced legislation last week to award Goodman with a Congressional Gold Medal for potentially saving lives on one of the darkest days in US history.  The medal is reserved for Americans who've made "distinguished achievements and contributions" to their country. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

20 Biden prepares to conjure hope and bear pain for a grieving nation
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_159af6e71a24c39bdf193f93a6551a7d
(CNN) - Joe Biden's life of resilience in the face of unbearable loss will take on new meaning when he steps up to deliver his inaugural address Wednesday as the nation's 46th President. Destiny has paired America's new leader -- a man rocked by tragedy who found the strength to heal his own soul -- with a sick, hurting nation that needs to summon similar steel to beat its harrowing crises. Biden's overflowing empathy was forged in the unfathomable horror of burying his first wife, infant daughter and adult son. Just as he comforted bereaved supporters on countless campaign trail rope lines, he is now assuming the nation's grief over more than 400,000 deaths in the coronavirus pandemic. After finding new reason to live following his own bereavements, he's challenging Americans to honor their losses by uniting to win the battle to restore normal life. "I know these are dark times, but there is always light," an emotional Biden said before leaving his beloved Delaware for the mission for which he's spent a lifetime preparing.   The new president will also offer ambitious new plans to combat economic blight caused by lockdowns and promises to cross party lines to ease the country's embittered internal political estrangement. His inaugural address will symbolically turn the page from the "American carnage" wrought by his predecessor and also herald a new dawn in which decency will be returned to the Oval Office. At a time of national angst, it will seek to rekindle the quintessential American creed that tomorrow can be better than today. As he assumes the burdens of office, Biden, in the words of one of his favorite Irish poets, Seamus Heaney, will seek to create a moment when "hope and history rhyme." After a political system designed to thwart untamed power weathered President Donald Trump's assault, the new president will able to affirm the survival of American democracy -- even as the inauguration takes place behind high iron fences guarded by thousands of troops. With vaccines offering the possibility that the pandemic could begin to ease later this year, Biden can also conjure the prospect of better days within reach. And the swearing-in of Kamala Harris, America's first female, first Black and first South Asian vice president, will deliver qualified progress in the halting march to racial justice and gender equality. Biden's first duty on his return to Washington was to lead a moving sunset vigil under a purple sky at the Lincoln Memorial for those lost -- a step never taken by Trump, a longtime pandemic denier who appeared to believe that dignifying the dead stained his own image. The solemn event, featuring Michigan nurse Lori Marie Key, who sang "Amazing Grace," underscored Biden's promises to restore decency to the center of power as he seeks to nurture the country's battered soul. Under the marbled gaze of the statue of Abraham Lincoln, who took office in perhaps the only time when America has been more divided than today, lines of lights stretched like gravestones towards the distant Washington Monument. Biden's grave challenges New presidents typically use their inaugural addresses to bind the wounds of bitter elections, to reaffirm America's founding values and to inspire the country to join in a momentous national effort. "The only thing we have to fear is fear itself," said Franklin Roosevelt, whose Great Depression inheritance in 1933 is the closest modern equivalent to Biden's. As he worked on his own inaugural address, Biden had to contemplate a pandemic that has never been worse, a vaccine rollout that is a confusing mess, an economy pulverized by shutdowns and a generation of kids who have missed critical months of in-person schooling. His challenges have become even more acute since the election, as Trump's refusal to admit defeat and attempt to steal Biden's victory, as well as an insurrection against Congress, hammered Biden's legitimacy and exposed a White nationalist internal insurgency that will pose an ongoing threat to US security and democracy. While Roosevelt's famous line might find an echo in Biden's approach to the pandemic, the nation's fractured political state recalls Lincoln's frantic efforts to keep it together during his 1861 inaugural. "We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained it must not break our bonds of affection," the 16th President warned months before the outbreak of the Civil War. America's current chasms suggest yet more synergy between Biden and his moment of history. Despite decades of worsening national polarization, the President-elect still thinks he can enlist his old Senate Republican sparring partner, Mitch McConnell, in passing elements of his legislative agenda and a new pandemic stimulus plan. Many Democrats are highly skeptical. And Republicans who live in fear of Trump and his 74 million voters have no reason to make Biden's presidency a success. But Biden's old-fashioned bet on building an administration on compromise at a time when such sentiments have rarely been less incentivized was attractive to many voters weary of Washington's partisan wars. And after Trump tried to make it a liability in the campaign, his half-century career as a Washington insider might just equip him to overhaul the lame federal response to Covid-19 and lead the country out of its nightmare. An unlikely journey When Biden places his hand on the Bible on Wednesday and takes the oath of office, he will complete a political and personal journey that had seemed fated to fall short of the White House. The man who was once one of the youngest senators in history will become, at 78, the country's oldest president. This day would never have come had Biden followed his initial instincts and given up the newly won Delaware US Senate seat he won in 1972 after his wife and infant daughter died in a car crash. Biden spent months by the side of his surviving sons, Beau and Hunter, as they slowly recovered from serious injuries. In the late 1980s, he experienced his own health crises with a brain aneurysm that nearly killed him. But he bounced back. Tragedy would visit Biden again in May 2015, when Beau, an Iraq War veteran and Democratic rising star, died of brain cancer. Biden always saw Beau as a better version of himself. A tearful President-elect on Wednesday confessed: "Ladies and gentleman, I only have one regret: he's not here because we should be introducing him as president." Beau's death ultimately convinced Biden not to mount a bid for the Democratic nomination in 2016 against Hillary Clinton amid concern about his family's emotional endurance for a race. But fate called him back into the political arena because of Trump's aberrant presidency and the commander in chief's equivocation over condemning marches by White supremacists in Charlottesville, Virginia. "Joe Biden has a healing heart. He has been through so much," former Vice President Al Gore told CNN's Anderson Cooper on Tuesday evening. A changed man Biden is now a far more disciplined politician than he was for much of his career. His portrayal in the seminal "What It Takes -- The Way to the White House," an account of the 1988 presidential campaign by the late Richard Ben Cramer, was as a political charmer, with a dazzling smile, glad-handing style and preening self-belief that the presidency was his destiny. But Biden's 1988 campaign dissolved amid a plagiarism scandal. In 2008, he dropped out after an anemic showing in the Iowa caucuses. Even when he was selected by Barack Obama as his vice presidential nominee, many of the younger aides around the soon-to-be president considered Biden a loose-lipped caricature -- an impression he strengthened by adding to his long list of political gaffes. But Vice President Biden's steady stewardship of the Recovery Act -- which added to his pedigree as he sought the presidency this time around -- won him admirers, and after eight years of loyalty to Obama, he was loved and respected in the White House. Now, slowed a little by age, and with the windy opening statements that set eyes rolling in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee just a memory, Biden has displayed unexpected late-in-life political adeptness. Only a year ago, it seemed his political ambitions would again founder after terrible results in the Iowa and New Hampshire nominating races. But with trademark persistence, he hauled himself back up off the mat with a famous win in South Carolina, which rocketed him to the Democratic nomination and the presidency. His handling of Trump's unprecedented disruption during a treacherous transition was distilled from the wisdom of decades in high office, and a willingness to subvert his own ego for the good of the nation -- another stark comparison with the outgoing President. His campaign benefited from the curtailment of an exhausting travel schedule. But every time he needed to show gravitas and poise -- like in the debates against Trump and at the Democratic National Convention -- Biden delivered, showing a new, spare speaking style that was likely a preview of his presidential bully pulpit and was shaped by his tragedies and redemption. That durability in the face of personal angst is the force that will finally propel Biden to his longed-for destination -- the Oval Office -- on Wednesday. And it's why he might just be the man for a perilous American moment. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

21 Joe Biden grieves Covid victims on eve of his inauguration: 'To heal, we must remember'
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_41e850ebe592b541026b3969396769cc
(CNN) - One of the great tragedies of the past year, as some 400,000 Americans lost their lives to Covid-19, was not only that many victims died alone -- their loved ones robbed of the chance to say goodbye -- but that the pain of that loss was whitewashed by a President who chose to minimize and deny it. In a somber ceremony at the Lincoln Memorial on Tuesday night that was his first stop in Washington, President-elect Joe Biden signaled that honoring that grief and the terrible toll of the last year would be at the very heart of his administration. Elected because of his empathy and his compassion for Americans, who are suffering through a confluence of crises that have created a time of great uncertainty, Biden spoke just a few words as the sun set over the National Mall, casting a rosy glow in the twilight.  The President-elect told Americans he shared in their grief -- with his own understanding deepened by the loss of his first wife and daughter in a car accident as a young man and the loss of his son Beau to cancer at the age of 46. "It's hard sometimes to remember, but that's how we heal. It's important to do that as a nation," Biden said in brief remarks before 400 lights were illuminated along the edges of the Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool, marking the more than 400,000 Americans who have died from Covid-19.  He and his wife, Jill Biden, watched in silence, alongside Vice President-elect Kamala Harris and her husband, Doug Emhoff, as the reflections of the lights glimmered in the water. Hundreds of towns, cities and communities across the country joined in the tribute, lighting up buildings from the Empire State Building in New York to the Space Needle in Seattle. Cardinal Wilton Gregory, the archbishop of Washington, delivered the invocation and gospel singer Yolanda Adams performed "Hallelujah" after Biden spoke. Harris spoke briefly at the memorial, noting that "for many months, we have grieved by ourselves. Tonight, we grieve and begin healing together." "Though we may be physically separated, we, the American people, are united in spirit and my abiding hope, my abiding prayer, is that we emerge from this ordeal with a new wisdom: to cherish simple moments, to imagine new possibilities and to open our hearts just a little bit more to one another," Harris said. Biden and Harris come to Washington The President-elect arrived in Washington, DC, on Tuesday for the start of his inaugural ceremonies at a dark moment in American history, preparing to take his oath of office as the US passes 400,000 coronavirus deaths and is more divided than at any time since the Civil War. As he departed for the nation's capital earlier in the day, Biden gave an emotional farewell to his home state of Delaware, his voice breaking at times as he thanked the state's residents for believing in him and standing with him throughout his career. "I'll always be a proud son of the state of Delaware," Biden said at the Delaware National Guard headquarters in New Castle County. "Excuse the emotion," he said, tears streaming down his face, "but when I die, Delaware will be written on my heart and the hearts of all of us -- all the Bidens. We love you all. You've been there for us in the good and the bad."   He gave a moving tribute to his son Beau, who died of brain cancer in 2015 at the age of 46, stating that he had hoped to see his son become president one day. "We should be introducing him as president," he said.  The President-elect also noted the historical arc of his career witnessing the civil rights struggle as well as signs of progress in the United States. He said he came home to Wilmington, Delaware, from law school after Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated -- inspired by the turmoil to become a public defender. In 2009, he made the journey to Washington with Barack Obama, who became the nation's first Black president. And he is returning to Washington, DC, this week "to meet a Black woman of South Asian descent, to be sworn in as President and vice president of the United States. That's America," he said Tuesday.   The nation's continuing struggles for equality and racial justice also drew Biden into the 2020 presidential race. He has said he decided to seek the highest office after watching President Donald Trump's dismissive handling of the deadly White supremacist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, when he said there were "very fine people on both sides." Now intent on healing a deeply fractured country, Biden's task has never seemed more daunting after Trump incited a riot with his lies that the presidential election was stolen, which led an armed mob to storm the Capitol on January 6 and resulted in the deaths of five people, including a Capitol Police officer. On Tuesday, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said that the mob was "provoked" by Trump, in a remarkable final rebuke of the President after four years in which Republicans have often stayed silent in the face of the President's misdeeds. "The mob was fed lies," McConnell, a Kentucky Republican, said on the Senate floor Tuesday. "They were provoked by the President and other powerful people, and they tried to use fear and violence to stop a specific proceeding of the first branch of the federal government which they did not like." But McConnell noted that democracy had prevailed, even in the face of violent threats, and that Congress carried out its duties by certifying the election: "We'll have a safe and successful inaugural right here on the very front of the Capitol," he said. McConnell argued that the November election "did not hand any side a mandate for sweeping ideological change," given the closely divided Senate and House. But he said Republicans would seek common ground with Democrats as Biden takes office: "We are to pursue bipartisan agreement everywhere we can, and check and balance one another, respectfully, where we must." Washington locked down  Biden had hoped to infuse his arrival in Washington with a nostalgic twist by riding the rails from his home in Delaware, but that was deemed too much of a security risk at a time when the nation is facing threats from within. Instead the President-elect will arrive in a capital city Tuesday that has been transformed into a fortress with more than 20,000 National Guard troops securing the streets and protecting buildings that symbolize the enduring history of democracy in this country, which has seemed very much in peril in recent weeks. CNN's Pentagon team reported Tuesday afternoon that 12 National Guard members have been removed from inauguration duty as federal authorities vet those who are stationed in Washington, DC, to secure the ceremonies. Army Gen. Daniel Hokanson told CNN that two of the individuals were flagged due to "inappropriate" comments and texts, while another 10 were removed for questionable behavior found during the vetting. Col. Michael Dugas, provost marshal of the National Guard Bureau, told CNN's Anderson Cooper Tuesday that at least 17,000 members have been vetted so far. With the twice-impeached Trump still prowling the White House -- fuming about his election grievances and upcoming trial in the US Senate as he prepares to leave for Palm Beach, Florida, before the new President is sworn in Wednesday -- Biden hopes to shift the nation's attention to his agenda for halting the Covid-19 pandemic, accelerating the troubled vaccine rollout and rebuilding a struggling economy that has left millions unemployed. Honoring Covid victims The President-elect has been working on the inauguration speech that he will deliver at the US Capitol on Wednesday, which will mark the beginning of his effort to unite the country after four dark and tumultuous years under Trump, who is skipping the ceremony. The Covid-19 pandemic had already forced organizers to reimagine the day's ceremonies, including the traditional swearing-in of the new president on the West Front of the Capitol. Those plans were complicated by the January 6 siege of the Capitol by Trump supporters, who shattered glass and ravaged the historic building, forcing the Secret Service to keep plans in flux to ensure that traditional transfer of power will transpire peacefully and safely. In that unnerving environment, the military has been intensely vetting the National Guard troops to make sure there are no bad actors who would do harm during this week's ceremonies. With Trump's decision to duck out of Washington Wednesday morning to fly to Florida, he has dispensed with both with the traditional welcome of the incoming President and first lady at the North Portico and the joint ride over to the Capitol for the ceremony.  Instead, Trump took the unusual step of asking staff to arrange a sendoff of his own at Joint Base Andrews, suggesting that he'd like to see a red carpet, a Color Guard and a 21-gun-salute. On Wednesday, Biden will attend church at St. Matthews in Washington, DC, with all four top congressional leaders from both parties. The President-elect will also lay a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, joined by former President Barack Obama and and first lady Michelle Obama, former President George W. Bush and first lady Laura Bush, and former President Bill Clinton and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.   © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

22 READ: President Joe Biden's schedule for his first full day in office
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_2f9a266b01bbceb3f7c717aafa2168c8
(CNN) - President Joe Biden's first full day in office Thursday will include an intelligence briefing and a meeting with his administration's Covid-19 team, according to a schedule released by the White House late Wednesday. Read the schedule, which is subject to change and doesn't reflect all of the President's daily activities, below:
10:00 a.m. ET: The President, the first lady, the vice president and the second gentleman watch the Virtual Presidential Inaugural Prayer Service.
12:45 a.m. ET: The President and the vice president receive the President's Daily Brief.
2:00 p.m. ET: The President delivers remarks on his administration's Covid-19 response, and signs executive orders and other presidential actions; the vice president also attends.
2:25 p.m. ET: The President and the vice president receive a briefing from members of their Covid-19 team.
Briefing Schedule
4:00 p.m. ET: Press briefing by press secretary Jen Psaki      • 10 a.m. ET: The President, the first lady, the vice president and the second gentleman watch the Virtual Presidential Inaugural Prayer Service.
     • 12:45 p.m. ET: The President and the vice president receive the President's Daily Brief.
     • 2 p.m. ET: The President delivers remarks on his administration's Covid-19 response and signs executive orders and other presidential actions; the vice president attends.
     • 2:25 p.m. ET: The President and the vice president receive a briefing from members of their Covid-19 team. Briefing schedule      • 4 p.m. ET: News briefing by press secretary Jen Psaki. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

23 Biden pledges America will 'engage with the world once again'
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_6cee75ef90afbb5b63f5ac0672b69441
(CNN) - US President Joe Biden will rightly spend his first days in office addressing the myriad domestic crises that he has inherited from his predecessor, Donald Trump. However, the transfer of power in the most powerful elected office in the world usually means a change in foreign policy, too. And if President Biden's inaugural address is anything to go by, the global focus for the next four years will chiefly be to restore the world's trust in America after the chaotic foreign policy of the one-term Trump administration. In his address, Biden spoke of a moment of "renewal and resolve," and described his victory as "the triumph of a cause, the cause of democracy." But what will the 46th American president do to heal democracy around the world that Trump seemingly went out of his way to undermine and wound? Throughout his address, Biden repeated the importance of restoring unity and the sanctity of democracy across America. He spoke, as many presidents have before him, of America being a beacon for the world. It's no secret that under Trump, America's role as the shining city on the hill had been severely undermined. Whether it was using the office to tell trivial lies, naked attempts to suppress postal votes, promoting conspiracy theories about the legitimacy of the US election or cozying up to dictators and regimes that trampled on their own populations, Trump trashed America's credibility on the world stage.  'America's role in the world'   Biden's speech didn't make any major foreign policy announcements, but he tried to assure those watching around the world that his America will be a more reliable and stable global partner. His direct "message to those beyond our borders" was that America had been tested, but that it "will repair our alliances and engage with the world once again" as a "trusted partner for peace and security."  This suggests a return to the pre-Trump era of America leading the Western order, underpinning NATO and restoring a multilateral approach to foreign policy. He has already announced that he will re-join the Paris climate accord and it is very likely he will try and open talks with the partners who signed the Iran nuclear deal under Barack Obama.  However, reversing some of Trump's more hostile global actions might be less simple than issuing a few executive orders. It was only last week that Trump ignited a series of diplomatic wildfires for Biden to put out.  He poked China in the eye by by lifting restrictions on contacts between American officials and representatives from Taiwan; designated Houthi rebels in Yemen as a foreign terrorist organization; and named Cuba a state sponsor of terrorism. And on his final full day in office, his administration accused China of committing genocide against Uyghur Muslims and ethnic and religious minority groups who live in the northwestern region of Xinjiang.  Whatever the various merits of these policies, they have inflamed relations that a new American president will inherit, and it will take more than calm words to settle them. Biden's first act as President was plea for calm and unity in America. It was the right message for his domestic audience. However, America's allies and enemies are well aware that the new President has a mountainous in-tray, and while he has promised to rejoin the World Health Organization and the Paris accord, what US leadership in a changed global landscape will look like is still very much unclear. The longer Biden takes to claim his place as the leader of the free world, the more those who enjoyed Trump's lack of interest in foreign affairs will seek to exploit the void left by America as it took a backseat on the world stage.   © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

24 QAnon believers are in disarray after Biden is inaugurated
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_90403961ca9cbc736ecd12e4f2c3659e
(CNN Business) - For years, believers of the QAnon conspiracy theory had been waiting for the moment when a grand plan would be put into action and secret members of a supposed Satanic pedophilia ring at the highest ranks of government and Hollywood would suddenly be exposed, rounded up and possibly even publicly executed. They were nearly always sure it was right around the corner, but "The Storm" never came — and the moment of Joe Biden's inauguration was the last possible opportunity for President Donald Trump to put the plan in motion.  But as Biden raised his hand and swore an oath to defend the Constitution, becoming the nation's 46th president — nothing happened.   The anti-climax sent QAnon adherents into a frenzy of confusion and disbelief, almost instantly shattering a collective delusion that had been nurtured and amplified by many on the far right. Now, in addition to being scattered to various smaller websites after Facebook and Twitter cracked down on QAnon-related content, believers risked having their own topsy-turvy world turned upside down, or perhaps right-side up.  Members of a QAnon-focused Telegram channel, and some users of the image board 4chan, vowed to keep the faith. Others proclaimed they were renouncing their beliefs. Still others devised new theories that purported to push the ultimate showdown further into the future. One of the ideology's most visible icons, Ron Watkins — who goes by the online moniker CodeMonkeyZ — told supporters to "go back to our lives."  "The most hardcore QAnon followers are in disarray," said Daniel J. Jones, president of Advance Democracy, a nonpartisan nonprofit that tracks extremist groups and misinformation online. "After years of waiting for the 'Great Awakening,' QAnon adherents seemed genuinely shocked to see President Biden successfully inaugurated. A significant percentage online are writing that they are now done with the QAnon, while others are doubling down and promoting new conspiracies."  The smattering of reactions underscores the uncertain future now facing the QAnon movement, which tech companies had allowed to metastasize on their platforms for years but didn't start taking action against in earnest until 2020.   The baseless conspiracy theory has been circulating since 2017. In addition to alleging a vast child-trafficking conspiracy, those who were drawn in claim that government bureaucrats comprising a "deep state" were quietly working to undermine President Donald Trump's agenda. Trump himself fueled the claims by refusing to publicly denounce them on national television.  And people identifying as part of the QAnon movement were part of the mob of Trump supporters who stormed the Capitol earlier this month.  Following the riots, QAnon supporters eagerly anticipated the moment of Biden's inauguration.   "As the noose tightens around the deep state, some people are becoming more and more desperate to discredit Q," one 4chan user posted on Wednesday morning. "I guess what they say is true. The flack is heaviest over the target."  But after Biden's swearing-in came and went, panic set in.   "We were promised arrests, exposures, military regime, classified documents. where is it????????" wrote one member of the QAnon-linked Telegram channel, which has nearly 128,000 subscribers.  "I'm scared, feeling sick in my stomach, but I am holding the line still," said another.   "Well babies are still being raped and eaten, any f**kin minute now GOD," said another.   Some began acknowledging the truth.   "Biden is our president," a fourth user in the Telegram channel said. "It's time to get off our devices and get back to reality. If something happens then something happens, but for now I'm logging out of all social media. It's been fun guys but it's unfortunately over."  Other believers insisted that the lack of a climax was itself a part of the plan, theorizing that Trump merely "allowed" Biden to become president "for appearances" while the former reality show host would be the one pulling the strings. "Anything that happens in the next 4 years is actually President Trumps doing," wrote one 4chan user.  "It's a hot mess, frankly," said Carla Hill, research fellow at the Anti-Defamation League's Center on Extremism, of the various reactions of QAnon believers. "Frustration started seeping in. There is some embarrassment, some anger ... A range of [new] conspiracies are spinning out of this and they are arguing among themselves."   The apparent ease with which some QAnon believers have been able to adjust the theory to suit new events underscores how slippery the conspiracy theory can be. But the proliferation of new theories and beliefs could also lead to a splintering of the movement — and, some extremism experts warn, a potentially new crisis in mental health.   As QAnon believers got pulled deeper into the conspiracy theory, they built a comforting belief system around themselves, said Marc Ambinder, a senior fellow who studies mis- and disinformation at the University of Southern California's Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism.   "The 'plan' was so much more powerful in the abstract than anything you could offer in the real world to counter it," he said.   But now, as many QAnon supporters are increasingly confronted by reality, the resulting cognitive dissonance could break them, Ambinder said — with potentially devastating consequences.   "This type of event is the kind of thing that can set somebody who is already incredibly anxious, in the time of a horrible global pandemic, feeling like they're completely pushed to the edge," Ambinder said, saying he fears more of the type of violence that the country witnessed at the US Capitol two weeks ago.  In recent weeks, CNN has seen Trump supporters embracing the idea of martial law in large numbers on various social networks. Earlier this week, a Telegram account falsely purporting to be run by Gen. John Hyten, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the moment some supporters had been waiting for -- that is Trump finally acting and using the military to crush his enemies -- was coming. A spokesperson for Gen. Hyten told CNN Tuesday morning that the account is "an absolute fake" and added the Pentagon was "actively working" to get it taken down.  Major social networks have stepped up their crackdowns of QAnon as of late. On Tuesday night, Facebook said that since August it has removed about 18,300 Facebook profiles and 27,300 accounts on its subsidiary Instagram for violating its policies against QAnon. The company has also removed 10,500 groups and 510 events for the same reason.  Last week, Twitter said it banned more than 70,000 accounts for promoting QAnon.  But that may not be enough. People who are embedded in conspiracy theories do not listen to authoritative voices, said Ambinder, but rather to the voices they consider to be authoritative in upholding their worldview.   Even though Trump may no longer be president, he and his political allies — some of whom still serve in government — may be some of the only ones who can draw QAnon believers back to the real world, according to Ambinder.  "For the sake of hundreds of thousands of people who are still trapped in the QAnon alternate world and have no idea what to do," said Ambinder, "this is when Republicans who cynically and willfully spread the false 'election was stolen' rumor need to step up."  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

25 California officials say providers can resume administering Moderna vaccine from a specific lot after pause
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_c45cba0429bd18777948b6c38dc0fb10
(CNN) - California health officials have given providers the all-clear to "immediately" resume administering the Moderna vaccine from a specific lot after pausing earlier this week due to possible allergic reactions.  The state's health department previously said it was aware of fewer than 10 people who received shots from the lot and required medical attention.  "Out of an abundance of caution, we recommended that providers pause the distribution of Moderna COVID-19 vaccine lot 41L20A on Sunday evening. Yesterday, we convened the Western States Scientific Safety Review Workgroup and additional allergy and immunology specialists to examine the evidence collected," state epidemiologist Dr. Erica Pan said in a statement Wednesday.  Health experts found "no scientific basis to continue the pause," Pan added.  Moderna said earlier this week 37 different states got shipments from the lot, which included more than 1.2 million doses, adding that most had likely been used.  More than 330,000 doses from the lot were distributed to 287 providers across California between January 5 and January 12. Tens of thousands of doses may have already been administered when the state's health officials made their initial announcement, a spokesperson for the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) previously said.  But CDPH said Sunday fewer than 10 people at a San Diego clinic who received the Covid-19 vaccines from the lot required medical attention over the span of 24 hours. The state said it was not aware of anyone at any of the other 286 sites who had similar allergic reactions after receiving the vaccine from the lot.  The latest findings, Pan said Wednesday, "should continue to give Californians confidence that vaccines are safe and effective, and that the systems put in place to ensure vaccine safety are rigorous and science-based." "Members of my family who have qualified to receive the vaccine as health care workers or because of their age have already received the COVID-19 vaccine, and I encourage every Californian to get the vaccine when it's their turn," Pan added.  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

26 The China trade war is one thing Joe Biden won't be rushing to fix
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_02bad953ba59b530a4a2cc1070fc7e87
Hong Kong  (CNN Business) - US President Joe Biden is inheriting a tense and messy relationship with China from his predecessor. From a grueling trade war to a slew of sanctions on the country's most prominent tech companies, the Trump administration spent the bulk of the last four years piling pressure on the United States' biggest economic rival. Things only became more heated in recent weeks as Washington slapped additional restrictions on Chinese business and investment.  Biden will strike a more predictable and diplomatic tone than former President Donald Trump. But analysts say that the new administration isn't likely to ease up on Beijing too much when it comes to tech and trade. "It is difficult to see a US reversal of the recent hawkish trends in China policy, given the increasingly negative views on China in the US," Sylvia Sheng, a global strategist at JP Morgan Asset Management, wrote in a research note this week.  Biden's cabinet nominees are already starting to bolster that view. Janet Yellen, his pick to lead the Treasury Department, promised Tuesday to take on China's "abusive, unfair and illegal practices." "China is undercutting American companies by dumping products, erecting trade barriers, and giving away subsidies to corporations," she told the Senate Finance Committee, echoing some of the Trump administration's biggest criticisms of the world's second largest economy. A multilateral approach on trade The Trump administration agreed to what was billed as a "truce" with Beijing in early 2020, almost two years after starting the trade war by slapping heavy tariffs on Chinese goods. As part of that deal, the two countries agreed to reduce some tariffs and allow Beijing to avoid additional taxes on almost $160 billion of the country's goods. China also agreed to purchase $200 billion worth of US products over the next couple of years. That agreement hasn't exactly played out as intended. As of November, China was on pace to purchase only about half of that amount, according to an analysis from the Peterson Institute for International Economics.  There are plenty of other loose ends, too. Trump never resolved some of Washington's biggest complaints about Beijing, including its favoritism for state-owned enterprises and his accusation that the country steals US technology. (Chinese officials have repeatedly denied such allegations and argued that any tech secrets handed over by American companies were part of agreed deals.) "It might be tempting to go back to the good old days and just tie back together those frayed trade links," wrote Roger Kay, a tech analyst at Endpoint Technologies, in a report this week. But the US-China relationship was "one-sided," he added, pointing out that Beijing has often demanded American companies partner with Chinese ones and hand over large stakes in their operations, among other requirements.  While removing tariffs on Chinese goods likely won't be a big priority for Biden, several experts — and Yellen herself — said the new administration will want to make better use of its major alliances to craft a more predictable trade strategy. It's hard, for example, to see Biden attacking Washington's longtime European allies the way Trump did. Biden "continues to say he wants to approach China via a coalition of other democracies, and that will take time to build," said William Reinsch, a trade expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies who served for 15 years as president of the National Foreign Trade Council. "The [China] relationship is too important to ignore, but I don't see him rushing into anything." Navigating tech tensions Biden will also have to navigate escalating tensions in technology and business. Those likely aren't going to subside, given bipartisan support for the view that China poses a major threat to US national security. After targeting telecoms equipment maker Huawei and social media platform TikTok, Trump ratcheted up the pressure on China as his term wound down. During its last few weeks, his administration imposed a series of harsh penalties on Chinese companies that will make it hard for Biden to easily reset relations, even if he wanted to.  Chipmaker SMIC, smartphone maker Xiaomi and a handful of other firms have been banned from accepting American investment, for example. And the New York Stock Exchange recently halted trading in three big Chinese telecom companies and several other firms to comply with the investment ban, which applies to companies that Washington deems to be affiliated with or supportive of the Chinese military.  Some of Trump's recent actions — including an order that would ban US transactions with some Chinese apps — were not fully implemented during his time in office. Others, including his attempts to ban TikTok and Tencent's WeChat app, have been tied up in court. It's not clear whether Biden will try to see those measures through. But "even if there is a return to measured language and diplomacy, we could see more strategic decoupling from Chinese digital companies" under Biden, Alex Capri, a research fellow at Hinrich Foundation and a visiting senior fellow at National University of Singapore, told CNN Business last week. He pointed to the possibility that Alibaba's cloud services could face the kind of global backlash that Huawei's 5G business has run into. Some experts are more optimistic about how Biden might proceed.  "We expect Biden's team to focus on domestic issues," Jefferies analysts wrote in a Wednesday research note. "Although Biden's cabinet candidates have talked tough on China, we believe his strategy would be more consensual and less disruptive to financial markets." But others maintain that the prospect of worsening US-China tensions still exist. The consultancy Eurasia Group sees US-China tensions as one of the biggest risks of 2021, adding that Biden will likely enlist allies from the European Union, Japan and India to push back on China.  "The new administration will have some successes — suspicion of China is broadly growing," wrote Eurasia Group President Ian Bremmer and Chairman Cliff Kupchan in a report this month. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

27 What made 'Celebrating America' soar
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_8c5a129ac39a419eab44852b69d69a1f
Editor's Note: Gene Seymour is a critic who has written about music, movies and culture for The New York Times, Newsday, Entertainment Weekly and The Washington Post. Follow him on Twitter @GeneSeymour. The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author. View more opinion at CNN. (CNN) - Other inaugural celebrations have festooned chilly Washington, DC, nights in white ties, gilded gowns, and crowded dance floors. Not this one. Forget the imperial pomp, gaudy bunting, multi-kilowatt star power summoned, say, 60 years ago on this same night when John F. Kennedy, the first Roman Catholic President and the youngest man ever elected, was feted by a pageant of stars gathered together by his friend Frank Sinatra and brother-in-law Peter Lawford. The performers that night were Ethel Merman, Harry Belafonte, Ella Fitzgerald, Nat King Cole, Gene Kelly ... you get the idea.   That was 1961. And how in 2021, in the middle of a pandemic, do we celebrate the inauguration of Joseph R. Biden Jr., the second Roman Catholic President and the oldest ever elected? Can't party with Covid-19.   So, would you settle for something like ... I don't know ... a digital pep rally?   If you've watched Joe Biden run for office or deliver a stemwinder sometime during his 36-year run in the US Senate, you know how good a cheerleader he is for the large-d-and-small-d democratic faith.   Maybe it was providential, then, that Joe Biden's Very Big Day was capped Wednesday night by the first and maybe (one fervently hopes) last socially distant inaugural celebration, mostly live and nationally televised, mostly, from the Lincoln Memorial.    Even if you didn't know who was on the guest list for "Celebrating America" in advance, it only took a couple of guitar strokes sheathed in darkness to let you know that The Boss was going to set the table for this one.    And Bruce Springsteen, with grizzled assurance and a veteran's panache, opened the proceedings all by himself, in a pea jacket and a weathered axe, with "Land of Hopes and Dreams." His lyrics carried forth the hard-driving big-ticket effects of the musical performances at the swearing-in ceremonies almost eight hours earlier with Lady Gaga's stirring performance of "The Star-Spangled Banner" and Jennifer Lopez's laser-focused mix of "America the Beautiful" with Woody Guthrie's populist anthem, "This Land is Your Land."    Springsteen's lyrics and minimalist delivery pretty much picked up where Guthrie's left off: "... this train, dreams will not be thwarted/This train faith will be rewarded/This train hear the steel rails singing/This train, bells of freedom ringing ..."    Springsteen said before he began that he was cold and host Tom Hanks looked and sounded somewhat shivery and slightly creaky as he welcomed millions of viewers to an all-but-vacant Capitol Mall. Hanks' tone and the prevailing atmosphere seemed less like a celebration at first and more like the start of an earnest, but semi-solemn mass Zoom meeting bridged by brass fanfares.   It soon became clear, though, that this 90-minute broadcast wasn't a party designed solely for the glitterati and well-heeled corporate donors and politicos. "Celebrating America" delivered pretty much what it promised: a cross-country salute to front line workers -- teachers, nurses, delivery truckers -- who, in the prevailing sentiment of the night's narrative, kept the country going, educated its children, helped its needy, cared for its sick in the past ten months of shutdown and economic trauma. They had their say -- as did both Biden, who, standing in near-ghostly light in front of the text of the Gettysburg Address on a Lincoln Memorial wall, provided variations on themes delivered in his inaugural address by warning once again of the unprecedented crises facing America, requiring of citizens "the most useful thing in a democracy: unity." The newly minted, history-making Vice President Kamala D. Harris also had her own spot-lit moment, chiming in with her own encouraging words for Americans and insisting that however daunting those crises alluded to by the President, "American aspiration" would help get them through.    The pre-taped musical interludes -- as musical interludes go -- were a mixed bag: Jon Bon-Jovi warbling George Harrison's "Here Comes the Sun" as the sun was rising over a Miami pier; Justin Timberlake and Ant Clemons meeting up in a Memphis stage to sing of "Better Days" ahead (the neon-lit grit of the scenery upstaging the pop stars); Tim McGraw and Tyler Hubbard duetting on "Undivided"; John Legend hurling "Feeling Good" live into the dark District skies; Lin Manuel-Miranda reciting one of the President's favorite verses from Seamus Heaney's "The Cure of Troy."    As pep rallies go, it was well organized. But it didn't quite make one's heart levitate -- until towards the end when Demi Lovato pretty much saved the night with a breathtaking cover version of the late Bill Withers' "Lovely Day" that was braced by a heartwarming human quilt of Americans of all races, genders, ages and regions lip-synching, dancing and vogue-ing to Lovato's vocals. Little wonder that the President and the first lady were shown dancing with one of their grandchildren to the music before Katy Perry's vocal fireworks helped set off the biggest display of actual fireworks anybody could remember seeing on the Mall. I guess pyrotechnics are easy when you don't have to move a lot of people out of the way. Never mind. Another Inaugural Ball tradition was broken Wednesday night. After all, as Biden and Harris indicated, there's a lot of work to do Thursday.  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

28 3 National Guard soldiers killed in helicopter crash in New York state
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_540baf89d4c3c96b6c4df65bb4e13372
(CNN) - A military helicopter believed to have three people on board crashed Wednesday evening in upstate New York, the Monroe County Sheriff's Office tweeted. There was no further information from the sheriff's office on the condition of those believed to have been on board, or which branch of the military owned the helicopter. The crash happened in Mendon, about 17 miles south of Rochester.  This is a developing story. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

29 McConnell: Capitol mob was 'provoked' by Trump
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_27c81724d4521b02b36a79e701da5657
(CNN) - Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell on Tuesday directly blamed President Donald Trump for the deadly mob that attacked the Capitol, as the Senate prepares for an impeachment trial on whether to convict the President for "incitement of insurrection" and potentially disqualify him from holding office in the future. The typically tight-lipped Senate Republican leader rarely broke from Trump in his four years as president. But he led the Senate's certification of the presidential election that the rioters pledged to overturn, and has strongly condemned the violence at the Capitol he has served in as a senator for 36 years. "The mob was fed lies," McConnell, a Kentucky Republican, said on the Senate floor. "They were provoked by the President and other powerful people." The Senate Republican leader has not yet said whether he will vote to convict after the evidence is presented in the upcoming trial. McConnell has privately indicated that impeaching Trump would help remove the President's legacy from the public perception of the Republican party. McConnell touted that Congress did its duty despite the violence on January 6, certifying the victory of President-elect Joe Biden and Vice President-elect Kamala Harris. "We'll have a safe and successful inaugural right here on the very front of the Capitol," said McConnell. LIVE UPDATES: Biden prepares for inauguration on Trump's last full day in office McConnell's comments came as the Senate prepares to hold an impeachment trial over the House's charge of "incitement of insurrection." McConnell said on Tuesday that the Senate has received a message from the House that Trump has been impeached but noted that the House has not yet transmitted the article to the Senate. Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer advocated for convicting Trump and disqualifying him from holding office again. "We need to set a precedent that the severest offense ever committed by a President will be met by the severest remedy provided by the Constitution — Impeachment and conviction by this chamber as well as disbarment from future office," Schumer said. McConnell touted on Tuesday that Congress did its duty despite the riot on January 6, certifying the victory of President-elect Joe Biden and Vice President-elect Kamala Harris. "We'll have a safe and successful inaugural right here on the very front of the Capitol," said McConnell. McConnell said Congress would soon turn to work for the American people and asserted that no party has a broad mandate after the 2020 elections, which flipped the White House and Republican-led Senate to the Democrats. "Certainly November's elections did not hand any side a mandate for sweeping ideological change," said McConnell. "Americans elected a closely divided Senate, a closely divided House and a presidential candidate who said he'd represent everyone." "So our marching orders from the American people are clear," said McConnell. "We're to have a robust discussion and seek common ground. We are to pursue bipartisan agreement everywhere we can, and check and balance one another, respectfully, where we must."  This story has been updated with additional developments Tuesday. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

30 Former Trump campaign staffers worked on National Mall rally the day of the Capitol riot
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_98217b51feab7ec50816fcc5ae1921d7
(CNN) - After the deadly sacking of the US Capitol this month, President Donald Trump's reelection campaign has insisted it had nothing to do with the National Mall rally that preceded the riot and featured a speech from the President. But many of the individuals who helped put on the bombastic rally that day had worked to stage other Trump rallies just a few months earlier. Ten of the 12 people listed as onsite emergency contacts on the government permit approving the January 6 rally have previously worked for or been paid by Trump's reelection campaign, according to a CNN review of Federal Election Commission records, and several worked in the Trump White House.  The rally, billed as a "March for Trump," was organized by Women for America First, a conservative nonprofit group founded by a longtime Tea Party activist. The National Park Service approved a permit for an event that the group predicted would attract 30,000 people to The Ellipse on January 6, the day Congress certified Trump's electoral defeat to President-elect Joe Biden.  Later that day, a mob of Trump supporters -- some of whom had attended the rally -- stormed the Capitol, killing a police officer and leaving four others dead in the mayhem. Trump spoke at the rally, encouraging his supporters to "fight like hell" and airing debunked conspiracy theories about the election. Other speakers included his sons Eric and Donald Jr., his daughter-in-law Lara, his lawyer Rudy Giuliani, and political allies like Reps. Mo Brooks and Madison Cawthorn and Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton.  The permit shows that numerous former Trump campaign staffers were also involved in running the rally behind the scenes, although the campaign says they were acting on their own.  Of the 12 people listed on the permit as onsite contacts, seven were on the Trump campaign's payroll during the 2020 election, according to campaign finance records -- many of whom worked in roles that involved event planning or production.  They include Justin Caporale, the Trump campaign's director of advance and a former director of operations for first lady Melania Trump, who was listed on the permit as the project manager for the rally; Megan Powers, who worked as director of operations for Trump's campaign through January 2021, according to her LinkedIn page, and was listed as an operations manager for the rally; and Maggie Mulvaney, the niece of former White House Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney and the director of finance operations for the Trump campaign, who was listed as the rally's VIP lead.  In addition, two other rally staffers were paid by the campaign for event consulting last year. They include Tim Unes, whose event planning company, Event Strategies, Inc., helped produce Trump rallies and has worked on numerous Republican campaigns, and who served as stage manager for the January 6 rally.  Unes told CNN that he and his company had nothing to do with the march to the Capitol or the riot. "Our job here was to work on the rally specifically on the Ellipse -- we did not have anything to do with the march," Unes said. "Like any other good American, I am disgusted by what I saw of those people breaking into the Capitol." Trump campaign denies ties to with the rally A tenth staffer, Hannah Salem, who was listed on the permit as an operations manager for the January 6 rally, was paid by the Trump campaign for event consulting in 2018 according to campaign records and also worked as Special Assistant to the President and director of press advance, according to a biography on her event management company's website. The biography said she helped plan summits between Trump and foreign dignitaries such as Chinese President Xi Jinping, North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un, the Queen of England, and Pope Francis. Some of the rally staffers' previous work for the Trump campaign and the White House was first reported by the Associated Press.  Altogether, the Trump campaign paid the 10 staffers who worked on the January 6 rally more than $1.4 million in salaries, consulting fees, and reimbursements between 2015 and November 2020, according to a CNN analysis of the FEC data.  A spokesperson for the Trump campaign said that the staffers were working on their own, and that the campaign had no ties with the rally.  "The Trump campaign did not organize, operate or finance the event," campaign spokesperson Jason Miller told CNN in a text message on Monday. "No campaign staff was involved in the organization or operation of the event. If any former employees or independent contractors for the campaign worked on this event they did not do so at the direction of the Trump campaign."    Other than Unes, none of the other staffers or contractors who worked on the Trump campaign and the rally responded to requests for comment sent to emails, LinkedIn accounts, or phone numbers listed in public records.  One person close to the organization of the rally, who asked to remain anonymous because they were not authorized to share details about the event's planning, also said that the Trump campaign had not been involved. Many of the former Trump campaign staffers were junior level employees, they said. "Hiring former campaign workers was really just a matter of getting the logistics done," the person said. "Young campaign staffers who were let go after the election are out of work and familiar with the work ... they're kids and they don't have paychecks, that's why they were hired."  The group that planned the rally, Women for America First, did not respond to repeated requests for comment from CNN. The group was founded by Amy Kremer, who previously worked as an executive of the conservative group Tea Party Express, and her daughter Kylie Jane Kremer is listed on the permit as the "person in charge" of the event. In the permit approved days before the rally, the organizers referred to the possibility of other events at the Capitol that day but said their group wouldn't be involved.  "Women for America First will not conduct an organized march from the Ellipse at the conclusion of the rally," the permit read. "Some participants may leave to attend rallies at the United States Capitol to hear the results of Congressional certification of the Electoral College count." Other conservative figures and groups that were involved in organizing the rally have stressed that they planned a peaceful protest and have argued that they shouldn't be held responsible for the violent actions of the rioters that followed.  "Any suggestion that Stop the Steal participated in, led, or breached the Capitol building, itself, is defamatory and untrue," Ali Alexander, an organizer with the Stop the Steal group, told CNN in an email. "We cannot control the broader public any more than Nancy Pelosi does Antifa." Meanwhile, other prominent conservative groups also helped promote the rally. The Rule of Law Defense Fund, a nonprofit associated with the Republican Attorney Generals Association, released robocalls urging supporters to march on the Capitol. "At 1:00 p.m., we will march to the Capitol building and call on Congress to stop the steal," the robocall said, according to a recording first reported by the news website Documented. "We are hoping patriots like you will join us to continue to fight to protect the integrity of our elections."  Adam Piper, the executive director of the attorneys general group, resigned last week amid controversy over the call. The group's chairman, Alabama Attorney General Steve Marshall, told the Montgomery Advertiser newspaper that he had not authorized the robocalls and the group is "engaging in a vigorous review" of the incident.  Charlie Kirk, the founder and president of influential conservative group Turning Point USA, tweeted two days before the rally that his organization Students for Trump was "sending 80+ buses full of patriots to DC to fight for this president." He declared that the rally supporting Trump "will likely be one of the largest and most consequential in American history." Kirk later deleted the tweet, which was saved in a snapshot on the Internet Archive's Wayback Machine and was first reported by the news website The Daily Dot. A spokesperson for Turning Point Action, a political group affiliated with Turning Point USA, told CNN that Students for Trump only sent seven buses of students to the rally, and that the buses took the attendees out of the area after Trump finished speaking. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

31 Inside the fight for the Capitol: US Capitol Police officers recount being unprepared and 'betrayed'
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_7ab67018feadc16a6a0941f430e9590a
(CNN) - The day before the US Capitol was attacked, Capitol Police officers were ordered to report to the department's equipment depot to pick up helmets, an officer who was there that day told CNN. They didn't know why they were needed, but when they arrived, they were told to return later. The helmets had yet to be scanned into inventory.  When officers finally secured helmets that Wednesday morning following roll call, they weren't given direction for use or storage. The helmets are heavy, and it wasn't clear they'd need them for the morning's protest. Some put them in their lockers, others kept them near their fixed posts.   By afternoon, the officers in the Capitol were in a fight for their lives and for the seat of American government. They were left to their own devices, outgunned, without adequate protective equipment, unaware of backup, enclosed by people, many with weapons, attempting to take over the government.    New details, provided by five US Capitol Police officers who spoke to CNN, provide a deeper look at how department leadership left its officers unprepared and how the police force charged with protecting Congress was overrun, leading to the most successful assault on the Capitol in more than 200 years.  The officers who spoke to CNN felt betrayed by leadership. They spoke about the day's events, their feelings and observations, on condition of anonymity, citing fear of losing their jobs and a retributive command staff. Minority officers were hit with racial slurs by people attacking the building.  And before the fight was over, officers were forced to shout that they were police to law enforcement responding to rescue the building after it was lost. They weren't put in a position to arrest the attackers, to defend themselves, or defend the Capitol. They weren't put in a position to succeed.   The US Capitol Police handle dozens of protests and demonstrations and events each year. They're as common "as stoplights in big cities," one officer said. They know how to plan, staff and work these events. They've handled mass arrest situations and they've kept the Capitol complex secure even after protesters crossed their lines -- such as when more than 70 people were arrested inside two Senate buildings during the first day of confirmation hearings for Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh.   "There was no planning. No pre-planning. I just don't understand. For the life of me, why not have the same precautions as we did with other demonstrations?" one officer said. "Our management was completely ... nobody knew what the hell to do. Nobody was giving direction on what to do."   "I feel betrayed," another officer said. "They didn't even put us in a position to be successful."   Steven Sund, the US Capitol Police chief, resigned after the assault. The sergeants at arms for the House and Senate resigned after Sund. They account for two of the three-member board that oversees US Capitol Police. The third, the Capitol Architect, is not involved in tactical decisions and has not been ensnared by the scandal.  A retired general will lead an investigation into the security failures, Pelosi announced last week. What happened that day is now the subject of congressional and federal criminal investigations. A spokeswoman for US Capitol Police didn't respond to CNN's request for comment. Neither did the president of the labor union representing US Capitol Police officers.   Preparing for the day's events Officers knew of a protest, and they knew the President was speaking. They were not in an elevated posture of readiness and wore standard duty uniforms.   But the all-hands planning sessions that precede major events, used to brief front-line officers on all the contingencies -- where to send people in case of sudden need to evacuate, where to send people who need medical help -- never happened.  It wasn't that nobody had any sense things could go wrong. Days before the planned protest, Sund asked the sergeants at arms to activate the National Guard, a request they denied, Sund told CBS' "60 Minutes." His department's intelligence section also circulated a report warning for potential violence, according to a report in The Washington Post. Sund did not respond to CNN's repeated requests for comment for this story.  For some officers, it was the first time they were assigned helmets. Not every US Capitol Police officer is assigned riot gear that officers use in crowd or riot control settings, though items like helmets, face-shields, body-shields, batons, and protective padding are all standard kit for police in state-level and medium-to-large police departments.   "It started like a normal day. It shouldn't have started like a normal day," one officer told CNN. "The thing that struck me was getting messages from coworkers saying, 'How come the members keep saying watch your back, be careful, you guys watch your six?' They knew what was coming."   After the President spoke, a supervisor went on police radio to warn of protesters leaving Trump's speech and heading toward the Capitol.    "Here they go. There's a large number of Trump supporters, they're coming from the West. We need perimeter on the West," one officer recalled hearing.   At first, it was just a crowd. The officers who spoke to CNN said they expected the normal yelling, name-calling and occasional pushing against the bike-rack fencing that they've grown accustomed to from years of policing demonstrations.    "It started like any other demonstration, except it was a lot of damn people," one officer told CNN. "But when it went south, it went south in a hurry. There was not enough people to stop what was coming. What hurt us was, these people, they planned for it. They knew we weren't going to shoot. They knew they could get up on you and we're not going to shoot unarmed people."   As the crowd set upon the Capitol, police rushed the workers setting up the inauguration stage to safety. They evacuated in such a hurry that some left tools behind.  Before the violence, there was a call for a possible bomb. Someone showed pictures of the device to a police officer who used their radio to alert others, and police officers and the bomb squad had to respond. A few minutes later, they found another, and again more officers had to respond to create a perimeter and evacuate people.   Police can't be in two places at once, and the officers handling the bombs couldn't help at the Capitol. That's when the fighting started on the West front of the Capitol. Investigators later determined the bombs were real, though it's not clear why they didn't detonate.   "They start throwing tear gas. Gas grenades. Flashbangs. Shooting cherry bombs, rubber bullet type guns they were shooting us with," one officer said. "We have OC spray (another term for pepper spray) but we're pleading for help, send us help."   Some of the group had blunt objects to break windows and projectiles to throw at officers, including bricks, signs, fence posts, fire extinguishers, lumber and shields.   Some DC Metropolitan Police officers were already at the Capitol trying to hold a perimeter outside the building. They had been monitoring the group from the Ellipse, where Trump had spoken earlier.  "We were outnumbered as it was, but if MPD hadn't been there, they would have come right in," an officer said. "They slowed the advance."   The officers described the violence as methodical and escalating. Officers were coming off the line one at a time to decontaminate after getting sprayed or gassed. Gas lingered in the air. The spray used by attackers had longer range than the spray officers had, so those on the front lines weren't able to effectively use pepper spray against attackers.   Sometimes, small groups would pick an officer to fight, occupying the officer and any other officer who joined to help.   The breach of the first perimeter was fast, and police didn't have any real security barriers out. The bike-rack style fencing is used more as a guide to keep people from stumbling into restricted areas and they're light enough to be used as weapons by protesters if a protest turns violent.   "Finally, our less-than-lethal teams came out and we're deploying gas, flashbangs, fighting fire with fire. But they had masks, they were prepared. They had earpieces, they had radios. It's not a coincidence that once those bombs were found, they started to advance on us," an officer said.  There was a call for help at the West entrance to the Capitol, and the attackers watched the police shift resources, leaving the East front scarcely guarded.   A breach of the perimeter on the East entrance followed shortly after the West perimeter collapsed. Officers believe groups were communicating between the East and West fronts and coordinating the timing of their attacks on officers.   "They're methodical, lobbing cherry bombs, little bit of this and that," one officer said. "The people we were fighting. They had gas masks. They had earpieces. They had radios." "Look, when they busted through the bike racks and green fencing at the bottom of Pennsylvania Avenue, there was only like four people there. A woman, a supervisor, two other officers," an officer told CNN. "They busted through that. (The female officer) hit her head and had a concussion, she hasn't been back."   'You couldn't have arrested anybody' The officers who spoke to CNN, don't recall ever being made aware of plans to take back the Capitol. They remember hearing officers all over pleading for help, both in specific emergency situations and in general to formulate a plan to clear the building of the attackers. Neither recall being given orders about how or whether to arrest people.   Capitol police, once a decision is made to start mass arrests, will set up a square using bicycle rack fencing, surround it with officers and put arrestees in flex-cuffs and into the pen for holding until things calm down. Then, officers can each handle paperwork on a handful of arrestees.   That was not an option because, as the officer said, they were "getting their asses kicked."   "You couldn't have arrested anybody," one officer said. "You could not. We were surrounded. Normally in mass-arrest situation, they comply under arrest. But (the attackers had) already proven to us they wanted to beat our asses. No way arrests could have been affected at that moment. Just get these people out and survive."   Even if the officers wanted to go into the crowd to grab a single problem actor, their lines weren't sufficiently staffed to allow for a small squad of officers to wade in, grab someone and drag them back behind the line for arrest.   "Everyone was screaming for help," an officer said. "At that point, (officers) were just responding to '10-33' calls. Officer in trouble, needs help."  Once the attackers were on the rotunda steps and near the doors, people started climbing the walls. US Capitol Police don't normally staff the grounds outside those walls with more than a couple officers because they weren't seen as entrances, so the people climbing were able to break windows and get inside.   The officers at the doors didn't know people had already broken in behind them until someone went over the radio with that information, one officer told CNN.   "They're over the radio saying they've breached the doors, they've breached windows and got inside," one officer recalled. "They came in packs, and officers working inside are trying to lockdown areas where members may be, trying to get members to secret hideaways and tunnels where they'll be safe."   On scaffolding outside the Capitol, an officer climbed to try and arrest someone.   "You guys don't have the numbers," he told the police officer.   Sund told "60 Minutes" he requested the National Guard during the siege, and the office of the Secretary of the Army delayed the request, citing the poor visuals of soldiers protecting the Capitol.   "I don't like the optics of the National Guard standing the line with the Capitol behind them," is the answer Sund says he got from a representative of the secretary of the Army. The chief of the DC Metro Police Department has confirmed Sund's account to "60 Minutes." The Pentagon has denied Sund's optics claims and said guards were approved within about 40 minutes.  'We wouldn't have won.'  Once inside, officers were getting surrounded and encircled, fighting protesters, trying to beat people back. Flashbangs and gas were going off and officers weren't sure if it was police or protesters.   Lawmakers and staffers locked themselves in offices. At some point, one officer recalled the deputy chief (now chief) give an order over police radio to lockdown the Capitol. That means doors get secured with magnetic locks across the campus -- the Capitol and outlying office buildings. Members of congressional leadership were whisked away by officers who work dignitary protection.   Two men who walked into the Capitol after it had been breached told FBI agents that an officer, who appeared to respond out of fear, shook one of their hands and said, "It's your house now, man."   One officer was hit in the head with a fire extinguisher and later died. A woman climbing through a window inside the building leading to the Speaker's Lobby was shot by an officer, the only apparent use of deadly force by US Capitol Police that day.  One officer said he wouldn't have begrudged any officer for firing their gun, but they were outgunned. "I got 16 bullets in my handgun, 28 in my long gun. Then what?" he said.   "At that point, I wasn't looking for arms. But there were arrests with guns, a cooler of Molotov (cocktails was) found. We recovered 9 or 10 guns, found or taken off people. Guarantee so many more had 'em," he said. "You don't want to start a gunfight and have a bloodbath. We wouldn't have won."  "They knew they could get up on you without you shooting 'em," said another officer. "And there's so many. You could go hands on if you want, but there's too many people."   One officer saw two attackers flash law enforcement badges once inside. One said, "We're doing this for you, buddy."   An arrestee inside was freed after a group surrounded officers. He had already been cuffed, cleared for weapons and was on the ground when the group freed him, cuffs still on.   "(He) had that one guy cuffed thinking, OK, but there was no direction. What do you do? Who do you go to? there was no direction and the crowd snatched him from (the officer)," an officer told CNN. "What can you do? Gonna get into a gunfight over that guy?"   'I was just trying to survive.'  "The day ended when we got the reinforcements," one of the officers said. "But hours had gone by. It was a bad day."   The officers described reinforcements coming in, dozens at a time, in helmets and riot gear with rifles drawn. Police from DC, Fairfax County, Montgomery County, Prince George's County all mustered SWAT teams or other on-call officers to help secure the Capitol.    "You hear them going in and out of rooms and people are screaming 'blue, blue, blue,' so they know it's a friendly," one of the officers told CNN.   "I'm a Black officer. There was a lot of racism that day. I was called racial slurs, and in the moment, I didn't process this as traumatic," the other officer said, referring to racial epithets he received from some attackers. "I was just trying to survive. I just wanted to get home, to see my daughter again. I couldn't show weakness. I finally reached a safe place, surrounded by officers, I was able to cry. To let it out. To attempt to process it."   The next day, officers came to work bandaged and taped from the chaos the day before. The job of securing the capitol remains and there's an inauguration in a few days.   Others haven't returned, some with serious injuries like concussions.   About a week after the assault, the department's Internal Affairs section sent an email to officers asking to report colleagues for use of force that may have been outside Capitol Police policy. The officers who spoke to CNN found this offensive, considering the failures of planning and degree to which officers had to fight for the Capitol.   "I want to report the chief to (Internal Affairs) for getting one of our officers killed. I want to report command staff for keeping everything a fucking secret. Can I put that in a tip line? I don't care if an officer spit on one of those people," an officer said. "At that point they deserved everything they got and then some."   © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

32 Capitol riot investigators narrow in on extremist groups and military-style coordination
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_689d05420f0e5b538b2b9bcf5b8fc966
(CNN) - They moved in an "organized and practiced fashion" as they pushed through crowds toward entrances to the US Capitol. On the inside, several maintained formation, putting their hands on each other's shoulders to keep in lockstep. Some communicated over radios, while others gave directions with hand signals and voice calls.       Members of militant groups that stormed the seat of legislative power earlier this month during the certification of the presidential vote have quickly become a top focus of federal law enforcement investigating the January 6 insurrection.  At least six alleged rioters with ties to self-styled militias have been named in criminal complaints released in recent days, representing a small but alarming segment of the dozens of defendants charged to date. RELATED: Decoding the extremist symbols and groups at the Capitol Hill insurrection Some of the groups present, like The Oath Keepers, try to draw their ranks from former service-members and law enforcement officers, relying on their tactical training to patrol and intimidate at protests across the country. Many have been radicalized by racial rhetoric and false claims coming from the Trump White House, security experts say.    Through court documents and interviews with multiple officials familiar with the investigation, their organized role in the siege of the Capitol is coming into view and being built into cases that could potentially carry charges of sedition, indicating a concerted effort to incite a revolt against the government.    The information is also key to the efforts to vet the police and National Guard officers who are guarding Washington, DC, this week. On Tuesday, two members of the National Guard were removed from inauguration duty, a defense official confirmed to CNN. "That is a tier-one, top priority for both the U.S. Attorney's office and our federal law enforcement partners, to see whether there was this overarching command and control, and whether there were these organized teams that were organized to breach the Capitol, and then perhaps try to accomplish some type of a mission inside the Capitol," acting US Attorney for the District of Columbia Michael Sherwin said Friday.  In the pre-dawn hours of Sunday, FBI agents fanned out around a home in rural Woodstock, Ohio. Inside was the founder of the Ohio State Regular Militia, a group of veterans who'd made the 450-mile drive to the nation's capital, fueled by what they describe as a sense of patriotic duty as well as ​a history of grievances against the government and a belief in false claims about the 2020 election that they aired on social media. "We made it to DC. Spent all day protecting various speakers on the main stage in Freedom Plaza," Jessica Watkins, the Ohio militia founder, wrote on January 6 in a message posted on the right-wing friendly social media website Parler. In the lead up to the insurrection, Watkins, an Army veteran and bartender, according to an interview she gave to the Ohio Capital Journal last week, had vented her anger about pandemic lockdowns and repeated a "stop the steal" hashtag online, referencing the lies spread by President Donald Trump that election fraud prevented his November victory.    She posted about plans to provide medical care and security at the planned protests, offering to escort Trump supporters to their hotels if they felt unsafe. But soon after arriving to the Capitol protest, Watkins and her fellow militiamen allegedly moved to the front lines of a takeover.  Alongside eight to 10 other people in paramilitary gear and Oathkeeper paraphernalia (the Ohio State Regular Militia pays dues to that group, according to a charging document), Watkins began "aggressively approaching an entrance to the Capitol building," an FBI agent wrote in an affidavit filed in federal court.    "These individuals," the agent alleged, "move in an organized and practiced fashion and force their way to the front of the crowd gathered around a door to the U.S. Capitol."  Having broken in, she made her way with the group into the rotunda and squared off with police officers who tried to block their way, she later wrote on Parler.  "We never smashed anything, stole anything, burned anything, and truthfully we were very respectful with Capitol Hill PD until they attacked us," she wrote. "Then we stood our ground and drew the line."  Federal authorities arrested Watkins on Sunday and charged her with knowingly entering a restricted building. Another member of the Ohio group, former Marine Donovan Crowl, was also arrested in that state Sunday for his alleged role in the riots.  Thomas Caldwell, of Virginia, was arrested on Tuesday and is referred to as an apparent leader of the Oath Keepers in a charging document. According to the FBI, he stormed the Capitol alongside Watkins and Crowl and was "involved in planning and coordinating the January 6 breach."  It's not clear who is representing the three in court.   Focus on established extremist groups  The arrests of the two from Ohio are among the more than 90 criminal cases unsealed publicly against participants of the insurrection in the past two weeks. Prosecutors had initially focused on some of the more notorious and viral crimes, like the man seen walking in the Senate chambers with zip ties and the rioter who wore a "Camp Auschwitz" T-shirt, but began moving on alleged "militia" members in the past few days.      Many established self-styled militias have long aligned with anti-government and extremist causes in pockets of the US, and their camouflage gear and military hardware was not out of place in a horde that also included tell-tale signs of hate groups, like Confederate flags and Nazi paraphernalia.    Groups like the Oath Keepers, described by the FBI as "a large but loosely organized collection of militia who believe that the federal government has been co-opted by a shadowy conspiracy that is trying to strip American citizens of their rights," first became a prominent antagonizing presence at protests in Ferguson, Missouri, in 2014.  Last year, the vigilante groups became heavily armed fixtures at nationwide racial justice rallies spawned in the wake of George Floyd's killing. At times, local police seemed to welcome their presence amid demonstrations that occasionally grew violent. In other cases, they fueled the violence themselves, shooting and killing unarmed protestors, like in a chaotic episode in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last year where authorities charged a teenager with felony homicide. The group's reliance on military tactics adds an explosive element to already highly charged situations, hate group researchers say.    "This dangerous crossover is one of the reasons we continue to be alarmed by events like the January 6 attack, which provide right-wing extremists ample opportunity to mix with and potentially influence 'regular' Americans," said Oren Segal of the Anti-Defamation League's Center on Extremism.  As lawmakers voted to certify the electoral victory of President-Elect Joe Biden inside the Capitol, some men affiliated with so-called militia groups were attacking police officers outside and helping clear the way for people convinced the White House was being stolen to make their way in.  Colorado man Robert Gieswein, who, according to an FBI affidavit, appears to be affiliated with the Three Percenters, a militia movement that believes "a small force with a just cause can overthrow a tyrannical government if armed and prepared," is accused of helping to lift and shove a barrier against a group of Capitol Police officers as he tried to force his way into the building.  Jon Schaffer, the frontman of a popular heavy metal band from Indiana, allegedly sprayed a Capitol Police officer with bear spray while wearing a hat the read "Oath Keepers Lifetime Member," according to FBI documents.      Both men are facing charges related to entering a restricted building and engaging in violence. Schaffer was arrested Sunday in Indiana. It's not clear if Gieswein is in custody. It's also not clear if either man has retained legal representation.    Organized efforts?  Meanwhile, prosecutors in Washington, DC, have dedicated a team to examine potential charges of sedition, scouring travel records, communications and funding channels of rioters suspected of organizing and planning the attempt to disrupt the transfer of presidential power, according to Sherwin, the acting US attorney.    As they've combed through troves of images and video taken during the insurrection, investigators have tracked the military-style coordination among some of the rioters.    Some members of the mob inside the Capitol can be seen on video walking with their hands on each other's shoulders, which authorities believe indicates they were trained in certain paramilitary techniques, according to a person familiar with the investigation.  Some also used radios to communicate as they moved through the Capitol, according to a law enforcement official familiar with the investigation.   Timothy Hale-Cusanelli, an Army reservist charged over the weekend for his alleged role in the insurrection, used voiced and hand signals to encourage rioters to advance through the building, according to court documents.    Federal law enforcement agencies have warned in recent days of the potential for even more extremist-inspired violence across the country, including at Wednesday's Inauguration.  It's unclear, however, to what extent the threat will materialize, as the failure to secure the Capitol has led authorities to erect a protective fortress around the perimeter of Washington's downtown government center.    Even before their arrest, a conspiratorial bent had informed a plan for members of the Ohio State Regular Militia to stay away from Washington during the inaugural events.    It's a "trap," Crowl, the ex-marine, told The New Yorker in an interview before his arrest, adding in an expletive.   © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

33 Opinion: What motivated the Capitol rioters
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_c1d71fb1632a730409d2b4cdf3c14088
Editor's Note: Heather Tsavaris served at the US Department of State from 2002 to 2012, spending most of that time as a senior terrorism analyst in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. Subsequently, Heather served in a consulting capacity to the Department of Homeland Security's Office of Community Partnerships and now works to improve community well-being at the local level. The views expressed in this commentary are her own. View more opinion on CNN. (CNN) - As I watched the attack on our nation's Capitol, my heart broke and I was so incredibly angry.  But this isn't about one day of events. When I watched the people storming the Capitol, parroting talking points they have heard ceaselessly on social media feeds for months, their words matched the themes that I repeatedly saw during my 10 years working in counterterrorism at the State Department's Office of Counterterrorism and the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research. I was an all-source analyst, which meant I spent my days reading hundreds of intelligence reports trying to understand how al Qaeda, and eventually ISIS and al-Shabab, planned their attacks and how they recruited, radicalized and retained supporters.  Themes kept emerging. Recruitment messages were ones of strength that landed so well for people who felt they had no power. They offered a way to belong for people who felt like they were perennial outsiders, and they claimed your life may have been insignificant up to this point but, if you are willing to join the cause now, you will have meaning beyond your wildest dreams. The culmination of a very different kind of recruitment messaging that also played on themes of significance is what I saw unfolding at the Capitol, and I am haunted by the images, the words, the livestreams and interviews of people who participated in the insurrection, and probably will be forever. The sentiment that I heard repeated often from the rioters was that the President invited them there and told them to storm the Capitol. I saw videos of men who looked like the guys I grew up with in my small mid-Western hometown, who would be far more at ease at a Friday night high school football game than part of a group violently beating down the doors of our nation's hallowed Capitol. I heard young adults with wonderment in their voices, seemingly in disbelief that they made it inside of the Capitol. There were also the people excitedly telling one another, you have to tell your grandkids about this. After the Capitol was secured and so many of us continued to reel in shock, livestream footage from the lobby of the Grand Hyatt had a different feel.  There was a palpable sense of community, connection, and belonging amongst those who had traveled to be part of a historic day. These people had come to be together with others who were like them. They chatted about where they had flown in from, how they were thrilled to be meeting other "patriots," what this event meant to them -- mere hours after so much destruction and death had just occurred. One irony for me was that the last time I was in that Grand Hyatt lobby, I was receiving training from the US Department of Homeland Security on countering violent extremism.  To be clear, while I noticed striking similarities between the messaging themes like purpose, significance, and belonging that influenced the Capitol rioters and how people are recruited to join terrorist organizations, there were differences. One main one that I saw: Terrorist groups aim to harm civilians, but the rioters intended to disrupt a cornerstone of US democracy and, for a few at least, harm elected officials because they believe unsubstantiated claims about their votes were not being counted.  From a former terrorism analyst, who now works to improve community well-being, I know what it looks like when those ravenous for power manipulate people who feel they -- and their beliefs -- have been cast aside. Until we deeply understand and address how every human needs purpose, meaning, belonging and ways to contribute, there will always be selfish people claiming to fulfill these most basic needs towards their own narrow purposes, resulting in dire and sometimes deadly consequences.  As I, and so many others ponder what to do next, I can't help but think about how the US government has tried for years to address violent extremism: more stringent social media terms of use, improved community awareness, deployment of credible voices pushing back against extremist messages. All of these tactics have a place. We are talking about a different situation here, though. A powerful tool in this instance is deeper community engagement that seeks to humanize, connect with, and profoundly understand the needs of our neighbors, including those who went to the Capitol. Some were intent to carry out violence, did so, and should be condemned and fully prosecuted. But it would be useful to understand how, in the propagating of violence, they found such clear purpose and meaning, and intense belonging. Importantly, there are scores more who would never consider violence but who feel exceedingly marginalized who also must be heard -- frankly, on this issue and on so many more.  Although I no longer work in counterterrorism, my work is still very much focused on promoting belonging, purpose, meaning and ways to contribute in order to strengthen our local community.  To do this, I have led work in partnership with incarcerated men and those recently returned home to understand and create solutions together that improve their own sense of belonging when they are released. In so doing, community power brokers have said to them -- we need your help, your expertise. We can't do this without you. I have engaged with formerly homeless young people to leverage their expertise and ideas about how to support youth experiencing homelessness during Covid. I have witnessed these young people step into their power when they presented their work to city councils. Realizing that they are making history in their community. That these are the stories they will tell their grandkids. The goal of this work is to listen without judgment, unearth new insights, and create solutions together that offer true belonging and well-being for us all. Maybe this is the kind of approach that could provide more belonging for more people in a nation that really seems to need it. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

34 At least 13 killed as twin suicide bombings rock Baghdad
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_228ca243e8c11572dc740bcfe39719a5
(CNN) - Twin suicide bombs rocked a busy market in central Baghdad on Thursday morning, killing at least 13 people, a security official told CNN.  Security forces say they pursued the two attackers before they blew themselves up. It was the first suicide attack to strike Baghdad in nearly two years.  This is a breaking story, more to follow... © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

35 Biden starts fast on immigration by halting border wall and travel ban
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_4284bf99e176b863871a801957ced0d3
(CNN) - President Joe Biden kicked off his term by signing out a series of immigration executive actions, moving swiftly to undo many Trump administration policies and ending the national emergency that diverted millions of dollars to the border wall. Biden outlined an ambitious immigration agenda on the campaign trail that would reverse the actions of his predecessor, vowing -- for example -- to introduce comprehensive immigration legislation and maintain programs that provide relief to immigrants living in the United States.  While some changes can be jump-started through executive actions this week, other immigration policy changes will take more time. "There's a long way to go. These are just executive actions," Biden told reporters Wednesday, appearing as president in the Oval Office for the first time. "But we're going to need legislation for a lot of these we're going to do." That includes the administration's immigration bill that provides a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants living in the United States, modernizes the US immigration system, invests in border technology and provides aid to Central America, according to incoming White House officials.  Preserve DACA The Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, which shields undocumented immigrants who came to the US as children from deportation, has been in limbo since President Donald Trump tried to terminate the program in 2017. While the Supreme Court blocked Trump's attempt to end DACA, his administration continued to try to limit the program. Biden signed a presidential memorandum directing the Homeland Security secretary, in consultation with the attorney general, to take actions preserving the program. Biden's proposed immigration legislation will include an immediate pathway to citizenship for beneficiaries of the program.      Halt border wall construction Biden moved to end the national emergency declaration that allowed Trump to dip into additional funds for his border wall and will pause wall construction projects until further review, taking aim at a key element of Trump's legacy. The border wall, which Trump repeatedly cited over the last four years as an accomplishment, cost US taxpayers -- not Mexico, as Trump repeatedly and falsely promised -- billions and became emblematic of the former President's restrictionist immigration policies. Since January 2017, roughly $15 billion has been identified to construct around 738 miles of border wall through different funds, including those made available through Trump's declaration of a national emergency. Of the roughly 453 miles completed under Trump, the majority replaced old, dilapidated barriers with a new enhanced wall system, a marked difference from the fencing previously constructed in some regions. Forty-seven miles have gone up where no barriers previously existed, according to Customs and Border Protection. In the waning days of Trump's presidency, the White House continued to push relevant federal agencies to obligate funds available for the wall regardless of whether land has been obtained for construction, CNN previously reported -- a move seemingly intended to tie up funds prior to Biden taking office. Reverse the travel ban on predominantly Muslim countries Trump kicked off his presidency signing a hastily put-together executive order restricting entry into the US from predominantly Muslim countries. Biden moved to repeal those bans.  He will also instruct the State Department to restart visa processing for affected countries and will call for a review of other Trump administration "extreme vetting" practices.  Biden's immigration bill includes a provision that would limit presidential authority to issue future bans.                                                                      Revoke Trump's order excluding noncitizens from the census count Trump signed a presidential memorandum last year that would exclude undocumented immigrants when splitting seats in the House of Representatives among the states. Biden signed revoked Trump's orders and will commit to presenting to Congress an apportionment that is "fair and accurate."  Extend relief for Liberians Biden signed presidential memorandum extending Deferred Enforced Departure -- a form of relief for people from countries facing unrest or natural disasters -- until June 30, 2022, for Liberians residing in the United States.  Send comprehensive immigration legislation to Congress The bill would provide an immediate pathway to citizenship for farmworkers, DACA recipients and Temporary Protected Status holders. It sketches out a plan for undocumented immigrants that would allow them to eventually apply for green cards if they pass background checks and pay taxes.  The bill also aims to clear visa backlogs, improve immigration courts and authorize funding for border technology, as well as provide $4 billion in funding to increase assistance to El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras and to set up safe and legal channels for migrants to seek protection.  A group of House Democrats, led by Rep. Linda Sanchez, announced Wednesday they will lead the effort to pass Biden's immigration bill on Capitol Hill.  In a narrowly-held Senate, the climb on immigration is steep especially given how far to the right Republicans have moved on the issue since the 2013 bipartisan bill. Sen. Bob Menendez will lead the bill on the Senate side. This is yet another sign of the coordinated approach the Biden administration is taking with Democratic allies on the hill to push their agenda forward.  Ramp down "remain in Mexico" program Migrants arrested at the US-Mexico border will no longer be enrolled in a program requiring they remain in Mexico as their immigration hearings play out in the US, the Department of Homeland Security said Wednesday. The "remain in Mexico" program has forced thousands of people to wait in makeshift camps at the border, often in deplorable conditions. While the latest announcement marks a significant change, migrants apprehended at the southern border have largely been turned away under a public health order related to the coronavirus pandemic.  Coronavirus-related border restrictions remain in place, DHS said Wednesday. Biden condemned the "remain in Mexico" policy during his campaign and is quickly moving to bring it to a halt.  The change in policy doesn't affect people currently in the program. "All current MPP participants should remain where they are, pending further official information from U.S. government officials," DHS said. Revoke Trump's interior enforcement executive order Biden revoked Trump's 2017 executive order that made all undocumented immigrants a priority for arrest by Immigration and Customs Enforcement, saying his administration will "reset the policies and practices for enforcing civil immigration laws to align enforcement with these values and priorities."
Biden also called on his administration to review agency actions put in place under Trump's 2017 order and issue revised guidance. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

36 Biden rescinds 1776 commission via executive order
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_6fd858c1c468b0a50bbebd32833d77d3
(CNN) - President Joe Biden on Wednesday issued an executive order to dissolve the 1776 commission, a panel stood up by President Donald Trump as a rebuttal to schools applying a more accurate history curriculum around slavery in the US, Biden's transition team announced Wednesday. The commission had been formed as an apparent counter to The New York Times' 1619 Project, a Pulitzer Prize-winning project aimed at teaching American students about slavery that Trump, speaking last fall, had called "toxic propaganda." The announcement comes just two days after the commission issued an inflammatory report on Martin Luther King Jr. Day and just hours before Biden will take over from Trump, whose time in office was marked by racist statements and actions. In its report released Monday, the commission asserted that "the Civil Rights Movement was almost immediately turned to programs that ran counter to the lofty ideals of the founders," specifically criticizing affirmative action policies and arguing that identity politics are "the opposite of King's hope that his children would 'live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.' " Calling today's ideological divisions akin to those experienced during the Civil War, commission members also took aim at feminists and the widespread use of ethnic and racial identities in American life, arguing that they had been constructed by "activists." "A radical women's liberation movement reimagined America as a patriarchal system, asserting that every woman is a victim of oppression by men. The Black Power and black nationalist movements reimagined America as a white supremacist regime. Meanwhile, other activists constructed artificial groupings to further divide Americans by race, creating new categories like 'Asian American' and 'Hispanic' to teach Americans to think of themselves in terms of group identities and to rouse various groups into politically cohesive bodies," the report stated. Trump announced that he was establishing the commission last fall, following a slew of Black Lives Matter demonstrations across the country. He had blamed the school curriculum for violence that resulted from some of the protests, saying that "the left-wing rioting and mayhem are the direct result of decades of left-wing indoctrination in our schools." Larry Arnn, the president of Hillsdale College, who had drawn criticism for his comments in 2013, when he said state officials had visited the college to see whether enough "dark ones" were enrolled, was chosen to chair the commission. Carol Swain, who once wrote that Islam "poses an absolute danger to us and our children," was chosen as vice chair. Other Republicans have slammed The 1619 Project and expressed similar sentiments about the adoption of ethnic and racial identities.  Sen. Tom Cotton, an Arkansas Republican, introduced legislation last year that would prevent schools from teaching the curriculum. And Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, with one day left in his tenure, took to his taxpayer-funded Twitter account and denounced multiculturalism, saying it is "not who America is." "Woke-ism, multiculturalism, all the -isms — they're not who America is. They distort our glorious founding and what this country is all about. Our enemies stoke these divisions because they know they make us weaker," he wrote Tuesday. Nikole Hannah-Jones, the creator of The 1619 Project, said Pompeo's tweet proved the thesis of the project. "When you say that multiculturalism is 'not who America is' and 'distorts our glorious founding' you unwittingly confirm the argument of the 1619 Project: That though we were ... a multiracial nation from our founding, our founders set forth a government of white rule. Cool," she wrote on Twitter, also saying that the Trump administration had tried to censor The 1619 Project.  In September, Trump said the US Department of Education would investigate whether California schools were using The 1619 Project in public school curriculums, and he banned federal agencies from conducting racial sensitivity training related to "white privilege" and "critical race theory."  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

37 Paris climate accord: Biden announces US will rejoin landmark agreement
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_87b8cc9aa21bc72e58a0535b7e821f69
(CNN) - Hours after he was sworn in, President Joe Biden announced the US plans to reenter the Paris climate accord, the landmark international agreement signed in 2015 to limit global warming, in a sign of Biden's urgency to address the climate crisis. The US abandoned the agreement late last year on former President Donald Trump's orders. Trump spent much of his time in office weakening many of the country's bedrock climate and environmental guardrails.  Experts say that rejoining the agreement s is a significant step by the Biden administration to reverse the climate policies of the last four years. But now comes the hard work. As he takes the reins of the executive branch, the challenges that Biden faces rival any confronted by his 45 predecessors -- an out-of-control pandemic, a sputtering economy and the threat of right-wing extremist violence stoked by viral misinformation. Biden's action sends a strong message that the US is prepared to cooperate in the fight against climate change and seek to reclaim the leadership role it once held, experts say. Under the agreement, countries are expected to enhance their commitments to curb greenhouse gas emissions every five years. "It sends a very important signal to the rest of the world on one of the biggest problems we face," said John Holdren, a professor of environmental science and policy at Harvard University who served as director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy under President Barack Obama. "I think it is very important that the US demonstrates once again that it will take the global climate change challenge seriously." "Welcome back to the Paris Agreement," French President Emmanuel Macron tweeted Wednesday. Biden is also signing a raft of executive orders aimed at gutting Trump's climate and environmental policies. The orders direct federal agencies to review dozens of rules from the Trump era and aim to reverse any that are "harmful to public health, damaging to the environment, unsupported by the best available science, or otherwise not in the national interest." He also directed all federal agencies to review the threats posed by greenhouse gas emissions, especially to the poor, communities of color and young people, who are most vulnerable to the effects of climate change.  Whiplash of US climate policy When Trump pulled the US out of the accord, it was not the first time that the country had left an international climate agreement after leading the negotiations. The US signed the Kyoto Protocol more than two decades ago under then-President Bill Clinton, only to bail a few years later under President George W. Bush.  The whiplash on federal climate policy the world has felt from the US has damaged its reputation internationally, and experts say other countries will want to see concrete actions to back up Biden's words. "There is a lot of skepticism in the international community about the durability of American climate policy," said David Levaï, an associate researcher at the independent Institute for Sustainable Development and International Relations, who served as a liaison between the French and US delegations in 2015 during the Paris agreement negotiations.  "While it's not a legal obligation of the Paris agreement, the Biden administration will have to reassure the entire scope of countries in the treaty that the US is fully committed to a certain [emissions] trajectory," he added. In 30 days, the US will be back in the agreement. From there, experts expect the pressure on the Biden administration to ratchet up. Last year was supposed to be the next mile marker for nations to increase their greenhouse gas emission pledges, but the pandemic postponed a major UN climate summit that was scheduled for last fall. Those climate negotiations are now taking place this November in Glasgow, Scotland, where all eyes will be on the US to submit more ambitious targets to achieve by 2030.  The Biden team is not expected to set the new US goal for emissions reductions immediately, sources familiar with their thinking told CNN. Instead, it plans to consult with important stakeholders first, including Congress, labor unions, private businesses, mayors and governors. It is expected that Biden will then roll out the goal for reductions of carbon emissions by 2030 -- known as the nationally determined contribution (NDC) -- before the meetings in Glasgow, the sources said.  Because the agreement is not a treaty, the goal won't be legally binding. But America's reputation will be on the line.  "The Biden team should take the time to do this right. Conducting robust stakeholder consultations is important because the Biden administration should gather all of the advice they can, so that when they put something forward it has wide political support," said Alden Meyer, a senior associate at E3G, an independent climate change think tank. "The world is tired of the US roller coaster. They want to be sure that whatever the US puts forward has some real backing." Setting more ambitious goals and charting a path to meet them, even when he is no longer President, will be Biden's challenge. During his campaign, Biden set a goal of ensuring that the US achieves net-zero emissions by 2050. Climate experts say the goal is aggressive but achievable. Soon after his election victory, Biden named John Kerry, the former secretary of state, as his climate envoy, creating a new cabinet-level position focused on the climate crisis. Kerry has said that the climate will be treated "as the urgent national security threat that it is." Historically, no country has put more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere than the US, and the country remains the world's second largest emitter. China, which today produces more greenhouse gases than any other country, announced last year that it aims to reach peak emissions by the end of this decade and achieve carbon neutrality by 2060. The climate crisis is getting worse The state of the global climate also adds urgency to Biden's task. During Trump's presidency, global average temperatures continued to climb. The last six years were the hottest six ever recorded, with 2020 tying 2016 as the hottest year. Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations also climbed to a new high in 2020, reaching levels unseen in millions of years. Preliminary estimates by the private data analytics firm the Rhodium Group show US emissions did plummet by 10% last year, the largest drop since World War II. But experts attribute most of the reduction to the pandemic, which kept many Americans out of their cars and off planes, and expect emissions to rebound as the effects of Covid-19 wane. Before the pandemic, US emissions rose in 2018 and then fell by a slim 2.1% in 2019. In 2019, the UN warned that to hold global warming below the 1.5 degree Celsius threshold, global emissions would need to fall by 7.6% each year from 2020 to 2030. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

38 Biden names acting agency heads as key Cabinet nominees remain unconfirmed
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_e897687609e99053f6e0eac907adb7ff
(CNN) - President Joe Biden on Wednesday announced a slate of acting agency heads after taking office without a single one of his Cabinet nominees in place and confirmed by the US Senate.  "These individuals, nearly all of whom are career civil servants, will temporarily lead federal agencies while Cabinet nominees continue moving through the confirmation process," White House officials said in a statement.  Later Wednesday evening, the Senate voted to confirm Biden's first Cabinet nominee. Avril Haines, who was a national security official in the Barack Obama administration, became the first woman to step into the role of director of national intelligence.  The Biden team had previously declined to publicly announce the officials who would take over departments in a temporary capacity because of concerns the Trump administration could attempt to thwart or complicate their work.  The Republican-led Senate, amid the coronavirus pandemic and heightened security around the US Capitol following the recent deadly riot, had been slower to schedule confirmation hearings for Biden's nominees than it has for previous presidents. Five of Biden's national security Cabinet nominees, including Haines, faced Senate panels on Tuesday as part of the first step in the confirmation process.  Biden said Wednesday that he was not concerned that key nominees hadn't yet been confirmed.  "I'm confident we can move quickly," the President told reporters at the White House.  Vice President Kamala Harris on Wednesday swore in three new Democratic senators on Wednesday afternoon, which officially gave Democrats control of the Senate and could accelerate the confirmation timeline. Democrats will now be able to confirm Biden's nominees without Republican support.  David Cohen, a deputy director of the CIA in the last years of the Obama administration, will serve as acting CIA director. Cohen is Biden's pick for deputy director of the CIA, and the President's choice for CIA director is veteran diplomat William Burns.  David Norquist, the deputy secretary of Defense, will serve as acting Defense secretary. Biden's pick for the role is retired Gen. Lloyd Austin, the former commander of the US Central Command. David Huizenga, the National Nuclear Security Administration associate principal deputy administrator, will serve as the acting head of the Department of Energy. Biden's nominee for the role is former Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm.  Norris Cochran, the deputy assistant secretary of budget in the Department of Health and Human Services, will serve as the acting head of HHS. The President has chosen California Attorney General Xavier Becerra for the role.  David Pekoske, the administrator of the Transportation Security Administration, will serve as the acting head of the Department of Homeland Security. Biden's nominee for the role is Alejandro Mayorkas, who was a deputy secretary of Homeland Security during the Obama administration.  Monty Wilkinson, a career Justice Department lawyer and former Eric Holder deputy chief of staff, will be acting attorney general. Biden's pick to lead the Justice Department is Merrick Garland, a federal judge on the US Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit whom President Barack Obama nominated to the Supreme Court in 2016. Senate Republicans blocked Garland's confirmation to the high court.  Al Stewart, the deputy assistant secretary for operations at the Department of Labor, will be the acting head of the department. Biden's pick for Labor secretary is Boston Mayor Marty Walsh.  Dan Smith, a career foreign service officer who is the director of the Foreign Service Institute, will be the acting secretary of State. The President's pick for the role is Antony Blinken, who was deputy secretary of state in the Obama administration.  Andy Baukol, the principal deputy assistant secretary for international monetary policy at the Treasury Department, will be the acting Treasury Secretary. Biden has picked Janet Yellen, the former chair of the Federal Reserve, to lead the department.  Katy Kale, who served as the chief of staff of the US General Services Administration under Obama, will serve as the acting head of the GSA.  Steve Jurczyk, who was the associate administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, will serve as the acting head of NASA.  Ann Eilers, the deputy chairman for management & budget at the National Endowment for the Arts, will serve as its acting head.  Adam Wolfson, the assistant chairman for programs at the National Endowment for the Humanities, will serve as its acting head.  Rob Fairweather, a deputy associate director at the Office of Management and Budget, will serve as the OMB's acting head. Biden's pick for the role is Neera Tanden, the CEO and president of the left-leaning Center for American Progress.  Regina LaBelle, who was the chief of staff in the Office of National Drug Control Policy in the Obama administration, will serve as its acting head.  Kathleen McGettigan, the chief management officer at the Office of Personnel Management, will serve as its acting head.  Tami Perriello, who serves as the Small Business Administration's chief financial officer, will serve as the acting head of the SBA. Biden's pick for this role is Isabel Guzman, the director of California's Office of the Small Business Advocate.  Andrew Saul, the Social Security Administration commissioner, will serve as the SSA's acting head.  Gloria Steele, who served as deputy assistant administrator at the US Agency for International Development, will serve as USAID's acting head. Biden's pick for the role is Samantha Power, former US Ambassador to the United Nations.  Dev Jagadesan, the deputy general counsel at US International Development Finance Corporation, will serve as its acting head.  Richard Mills, who serves as deputy representative of the United States of America to the United Nations, will serve as the acting head of the US Mission to the United Nations. Biden's pick for this role is career diplomat Linda Thomas-Greenfield.  Maria Pagan, the deputy general counsel in the Office of the United States Trade Representative, will serve as the acting head of the Office of the US Trade Representative. The President's pick for this role is Katherine Tai, who oversaw trade enforcement for China during the Obama administration.  Later on Wednesday, the White House announced more acting agency heads.  Dave Uejio, the chief strategy officer at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, will be its acting head.  Kevin Shea, the administrator of the US Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, will be the acting agriculture secretary. Biden's pick for the role is Tom Vilsack, who served as agriculture secretary for the entirety of Obama's time in the White House.  Wynn Coggins, the deputy assistant secretary for administration at the Commerce Department, will be the acting head of the department. The President's pick for commerce secretary is Rhode Island Gov. Gina Raimondo.  Phil Rosenfelt, the deputy general counsel for program service at the Department of Education, will be the department's acting head. Biden has chosen Miguel Cardona, Connecticut's commissioner of education, for the role.  Matt Ammonn, who has worked in the Department of Housing and Urban Development, will be the acting head of the department. Biden's pick to run the department is Rep. Marcia Fudge of Ohio.  Scott de la Vega, an associate solicitor for general law at the Interior Department, will be the acting interior secretary. The President's nominee for the role is Rep. Deb Haaland of New Mexico.  Lana Hurdle, a deputy assistant secretary at the US Department of Transportation, will be the acting transportation secretary. Biden's choice for the role is former South Bend, Indiana, Mayor Pete Buttigieg.  Dat Tran, who serves as a principal deputy assistant secretary at the Department of Veterans Affairs, will be the acting head of the VA. Biden's pick to run the department is Denis McDonough, who was Obama's chief of staff.  Jane Nishida, a principal deputy assistant administrator at the Environmental Protection Agency, will be the acting head of the agency. Biden's pick for EPA administrator is Michael Regan, North Carolina's Department of Environmental Quality secretary.  Carol Spahn, a former Peace Corps country director in Malawi, will be the acting head of the Peace Corps.  Kelu Chao, Voice of America's program director, will be the acting head of the US Agency for Global Media.  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

39 Did that really just happen?
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_5d1ebadfa6fc948ac0bd32254f86a0b5
(CNN) - CNN Opinion contributors react to the most memorable moments of Inauguration Day. The views expressed in these commentaries are their own. Jill Filipovic: 'If only we are brave enough to be it'   It was an inauguration like none in living memory. There was a big first: The first woman, first African American and first Asian American was sworn in as Vice President. And there was a stark challenge: to inaugurate a new president at a moment of profound national vulnerability, after our democracy barely survived a domestic attack and when over 400,000 Americans did not survive a deadly virus.    President Joe Biden met the challenge.    Watching the pomp of the inaugural tradition, I was struck by the new meaning carried by the same words we hear every four years. When Lady Gaga performed the Star-Spangled Banner and sang, "and our flag was still there," my heart caught in my throat — what a thing to take for granted, that our flag would always be there; what a call to gratitude, to note that yes, even after a mob tore down the stars and stripes and tried to replace it with the banner of an authoritarian, today, our nation's flag flies.    We did not have a peaceful transition of power. But we did transition from an administration that ruled with vindictiveness, cruelty and prejudice to one that leads with sincerity, optimism and openness. Yes, inaugurations are performances. But this one told the world that while America was bowed by the Trump administration and by attacks from his supporters, we remain, as inaugural poet Amanda Gorman put it, "A nation that isn't broken, but simply unfinished."    As Gorman read her extraordinary poem, "The Hill We Climb," she embodied the best of America: "A skinny black girl, descended from slaves," she said, who dreamed of being president and was on stage to inaugurate one. A young woman who understands that this nation was not made perfect, but believes we can make it better. As the relief and ceremony of today recedes and the real work begins, her final lines offer a kind of North Star to orient us as we walk us out of the darkness:   There is always light.   If only we are brave enough to see it.   If only we are brave enough to be it.  Jill Filipovic is a journalist based in New York and author of the book "OK Boomer, Let's Talk: How My Generation Got Left Behind." Follow her on Twitter. The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely her own. View more opinion articles on CNN. Scott Jennings:  I'm a Republican and I'm glad for today   As a conservative Republican, I am under no illusion that I'll be happy with most of what Joe Biden does as President. A few of his expected executive orders and appointments have already given me great concern that his calls for unity are just words to cover up an unwillingness to say no to the more fringe left elements of his base.   But as an American, I am glad for today as it showed, ultimately, that our system held. It was strained, particularly in the last few weeks by Donald Trump's disgraceful handling of the post-election period, but we now have a new President, a new Congress and a chance, as we do every two years, to begin anew following a free and fair election.  There is relative equilibrium in Washington, with a tilt to the Democrats. Despite not controlling anything, though, Republicans do have an important role to play in guiding the country's future. There is an urgent need for both parties to unify over two things: distributing the coronavirus vaccine to as many Americans as possible, as fast as possible, and standing against the scourge of political violence.   These are crucial matters. We can't get back to normal life in America unless we get the vaccine to her people, and our democracy will be further imperiled if we look the other way when anyone -- anyone -- participates in or incites violence as a means to subverting the will of the people. We are all in this together, and that means accepting that our electoral system produces winners... and losers. It is an urgent matter for all Republicans to hear this message: we lost, but we can win again as long as we let go of the conspiracy theories that have driven too many people absolutely bonkers.   I wish President Joe Biden well and pray for his success. And I hope for a Republican Party that becomes a loyal opposition and presents itself as a viable, responsible governing alternative in the coming elections, even as it helps President Biden tackle the clear and present dangers to the American way of life. Scott Jennings, a CNN contributor and Republican campaign adviser, is a former special assistant to President George W. Bush and a former campaign adviser to Sen. Mitch McConnell. He is a partner at RunSwitch Public Relations in Louisville, Kentucky. Follow him on Twitter @ScottJenningsKY.   Roxanne Jones: 'Joy comes in the morning'   "This is the first time in four years I've felt like wearing red, white and blue," my neighbor Pat, a daughter of Kentucky, told me as we watched the inauguration of President Joseph R. Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris together.    I know exactly how she felt. For so many years now, I've been angry at America. Ashamed of my country. Disgusted at the unrelenting hate and ignorance many of us have spread around the world.    But watching the inauguration today, I had so many reasons to be happy and full of pride for my nation. I'm proud of the record numbers of Americans who turned out to vote, despite the deadly risk of Covid-19. Proud to see Vice President Kamala Harris, our first woman and first Black Vice President.    Watching record numbers of Black Americans who when confronted with unimaginable horrors and injustice, refused to be intimidated and who instead, used their power to sway the presidential election -- that makes my heart proud. Together, we even shifted the balance of power in the US Senate. We stood up, spoke up, ran for office and convinced our allies and people around the world that Black lives must matter. That equal justice must matter.   Today a majority of Americans rejected the politics of White power and insurrectionist ideas. And for the first time in four years, I'm comfortable sitting down with my White neighbor from Kentucky and singing "Amazing Grace" together with hope in our hearts for America.   "Weeping may endure in the night, but joy comes in the morning," President Biden said, quoting from the Bible, in his inaugural speech.    Amen.  Roxanne Jones, a founding editor of ESPN Magazine and former vice president at ESPN, has been a producer, reporter and editor at the New York Daily News and The Philadelphia Inquirer. Jones is co-author of "Say it Loud: An Illustrated History of the Black Athlete." She talks politics, sports and culture weekly on Philadelphia's 900AM WURD. Peniel Joseph: Biden's hopes for America are revelatory. Now the world waits for deeds The inauguration of Joe Biden as the 46th President of the United States promises a new birth of American freedom. Race proved central to Biden's inauguration address -- as it should be. He quoted President Abraham Lincoln twice and became the first president to ever acknowledge White supremacy in an inaugural address. "This is our historic moment of crisis and challenge," said Biden. One that could only be met through unity and national purpose.    "This is democracy's day, a day of history and hope, of renewal and resolve," Biden observed. He touted his victory as not a personal one, but as a reflection of the power of American democracy. Biden acknowledged the White riot at the nation's Capitol as a preface to words that called Americans to an aspirational citizenship -- bold enough to defeat the forces of racial and political division that have threatened so many of us under the Trump administration.     Biden celebrated the historic election of Vice President Kamala Harris as proof that the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice. He spoke of the ongoing devastation of the Covid-19 pandemic, but never lost the thread of racial justice, noting in a reference to a poem by Langston Hughes that "the dream of racial justice will be deferred no longer" and observing that the rise of "White supremacy" and racial terror would be confronted and defeated. Biden echoed the words of President Abraham Lincoln in his vow that his "whole soul" would be committed to national political unity.    Such unity must be based on listening to one another, respecting political disagreement, rejecting conspiracy theories and the spread of lies and false narratives that have undermined democracy.    The president's stirring introduction of his personal and political hopes for the nation centered empathy, respect and understanding in a speech that placed the struggle for racial justice as the beating heart of America's wounded democracy. The president's words proved revelatory and compassionate. Now the nation awaits deeds to make those hopes real.  Peniel E. Joseph is the Barbara Jordan chair in ethics and political values and the founding director of the Center for the Study of Race and Democracy at the LBJ School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas at Austin, where he is also a professor of history. He is the author of several books, most recently, "The Sword and the Shield: The Revolutionary Lives of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr."   Nicole Hemmer: From a bleak backdrop, Biden spun out threads of hope   The backdrop could not have seemed bleaker: the event ringed by the National Guard, the crowd shrunk by the Covid-19 pandemic, the echoes of the insurrection still vibrating through the Capitol. And yet, the inauguration of President Joe Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris could not have been a more hopeful event.  Rooted in the tragedy and destruction of the past several years, Biden's inaugural address did not shy away from naming the challenges facing the US -- what he called "a time of testing." hHe talked about the threat of political extremism and domestic terrorism, of White supremacy and climate change, of the unchecked pandemic.     But in his inaugural, Biden found the thread of hope. He found it on the stage, where the first Black, first Asian and first woman vice president had just been sworn in by the first Latina Supreme Court Justice. He found it in the nation's history: in the need for racial justice, in women's fight for the vote. And he found it in hard truths: that "democracy is fragile," and that if we turn toward decency, unity and healing, we will be able to say that "democracy and hope, truth and justice did not die on our watch but thrived." It is more a wish than a guarantee, a reminder that democracy must be fought for every day, that it is inherently fragile. But seeing a president commit his administration to that core work is reason to believe that American carnage can be transformed into something different -- even, perhaps, a period of democratic renewal.     Nicole Hemmer is an associate research scholar at Columbia University with the Obama Presidency Oral History Project and the author of "Messengers of the Right: Conservative Media and the Transformation of American Politics." She co-hosts the history podcast "Past Present" and "This Day in Esoteric Political History." Julian Zelizer: This was the opposite of the American Carnage speech   During his inaugural address, President Joe Biden defined his agenda as an effort to preserve, protect and strengthen the foundation of our political system. "This is democracy's day," the President said. For Biden, this day is about the "cause of democracy." He vowed to be a president for "all Americans."     The most important element of his promise came down to unity. President Biden promised that he would listen to everyone and that, even when people disagreed, it was necessary to have conversations. That is how democracy works. The inaugural address followed through on the major themes that have defined his entire run for office. He wants to tell a story of unity and not division.    "Politics doesn't have to be a raging fire, destroying everything in its path," Biden said. "Every disagreement doesn't have to be a cause for total war. And we must reject the culture in which facts themselves are manipulated and even manufactured."    To achieve this goal, the President faces an awesome task ahead. He will have to contend with a radicalized Republican Party that will have little interest in negotiation, let alone compromise. As he saw on January 6, and during the Obama years, the modern Republican Party has shifted far to the right and most leaders are not willing to break from the party line. They have engaged in a level of toxic, smashmouth partisanship that renders Biden's style of governing difficult to achieve.     He also must preside in a media ecosystem that has created too much room for sensationalism, partisan journalism and falsehood. In a world of fragmented and uncontrolled information, it won't be easy getting out his message. The space that we depend on to obtain our facts about politics does not unite us; it stokes division.     Can a president transform the basic institutional dynamics of American politics? The odds are low. But at least, unlike his predecessor, this President wants to give it a try. This was the opposite of  his predecessor's American Carnage speech. After the horrific events of January 6, this should be welcome relief to all Americans who want to get us to a better place.   Julian Zelizer, a CNN political analyst, is a professor of history and public affairs at Princeton University and author of the book, "Burning Down the House: Newt Gingrich, the Fall of a Speaker, and the Rise of the New Republican Party." Follow him on Twitter @julianzelizer.     Lanhee J. Chen: Biden's call to end 'uncivil war' was what the nation needed   America needed this day. The pomp and circumstance of the inaugural proceedings reminds us that despite a deadly pandemic, racial strife, political disagreement and a deadly mob whose goal was to prevent inauguration from happening, we can still come together to celebrate and honor the peaceful transition of power in our democracy. Today was a celebration of our national story. It wasn't a celebration that sought to cover over all the problems we face as a country, or one that ignored the painful days we've been through. But it was an occasion for us to take a collective breath as a nation and look ahead toward what we all hope are better days to come.    Joe Biden gave a unifying speech that I will remember for his call to "end this uncivil war" that threatens to tear our country apart. If our new president is able to do as he says and restore even some respect to the very real debates we are sure to have with one another, he will have been a success.   I will not agree with many of the policies that Joe Biden will embrace as president. But, as he noted, this disagreement does not have to make us disagreeable. Indeed, I pray earnestly that President Biden will be able to achieve what he promised to do in his inaugural address: to bring us together, lead us out of this dim chapter in our nation's history, and to be a president for all Americans.   Lanhee J. Chen is the David and Diane Steffy Fellow in American Public Policy Studies at the Hoover Institution and Director of Domestic Policy Studies in the Public Policy Program at Stanford University. He served as policy director to Mitt Romney's 2012 presidential campaign and senior adviser to Marco Rubio's campaign in 2016. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

40 Astronaut artifacts on moon -- like Apollo landers and Neil Armstrong's bootprint -- now protected by US law
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_fe001fc63af8125b5058812983cd8ed7
(The Conversation) - It's hard to care about bootprints sunk in soil 238,900 miles away as humanity suffers the combined burden of an unforgiving virus and a political unease. But how humans treat those bootprints and the historic lunar landing sites upon which they are found will speak volumes about who we humans are and who we seek to become. On December 31, 2020, the One Small Step to Protect Human Heritage in Space Act became law. As far as laws go, it's pretty benign. It requires companies that are working with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on lunar missions to agree to be bound by otherwise unenforceable guidelines intended to protect American landing sites on the moon. That's a pretty small pool of affected entities. However, it is also the first law enacted by any nation that recognizes the existence of human heritage in outer space. That's important because it reaffirms our human commitment to protecting our history -- as we do on Earth with sites like the Historic Sanctuary of Machu Picchu, which is protected through instruments like the World Heritage Convention -- while also acknowledging that the human species is expanding into space. I am a lawyer who focuses on space issues that seek to ensure the peaceful and sustainable exploration and use of space. I believe that people can achieve world peace through space. To do so, we must recognize landing sites on the moon and other celestial bodies as the universal human achievements they are, built on the research and dreams of scientists and engineers spanning centuries on this globe. I believe that the One Small Step Act, enacted in a divisive political environment, demonstrates that space and preservation truly are nonpartisan, even unifying principles. READ MORE: What's on the far side of the Moon? The moon is getting crowded, fast It is only a matter of decades, perhaps just years, before we see a continuous human presence on the moon. While it would be nice to think that a human community on the moon would be a collaborative, multinational utopia -- albeit located in what Buzz Aldrin famously described as a "magnificent desolation" -- the fact is people are once again racing one another to reach our lunar neighbor. The US Artemis project, which includes a goal of sending the first woman to the moon in 2024, is the most ambitious mission. Russia has reinvigorated its Luna program, setting the stage to put cosmonauts on the moon in the 2030s. However, in a race once reserved for superpowers, there are now multiple nations and multiple private companies with a stake. India is planning to send a rover to the Moon this year. China, which in December implemented the first successful lunar return mission since 1976, has announced multiple lunar landings in the coming years, with Chinese media reporting plans for a crewed mission to the moon within the decade. South Korea and Japan are also building lunar landers and probes. READ MORE: Hibernating lemurs may be the key to cryogenic sleep for human space travel Such private companies as Astrobotic, Masten Space Systems and Intuitive Machines are working to support NASA missions. Other companies, such as ispace, Blue Moon and SpaceX, while also supporting NASA missions, are preparing to offer private missions, including for tourism. How are all these different entities going to work around one another? Space is not lawless. The 1967 Outer Space Treaty, now ratified by 110 nations, including all of the current spacefaring countries, offers guiding principles supporting the concept of space as the province of all humankind. The treaty explicitly indicates that all countries and, by implication, their nationals have the freedom to explore and free access to all areas of the moon. That's right. Everyone has the freedom to roam wherever they want -- over Neil Armstrong's bootprint, close to sensitive scientific experiments or right up to a mining operation. There is no concept of property on the moon. The only restriction on this freedom is the remonstration, found in Article IX of the treaty, that all activities on the moon must be carried out with "due regard to the corresponding interests of" all others and the requirement that you consult with others if you might cause "harmful interference." What does that mean? From a legal standpoint, no one knows. READ MORE: How nine days underwater helps scientists understand what life on a moon base will be like Outstanding universal value It can reasonably be argued that interfering with an experiment or a lunar mining operation would be harmful, cause quantifiable damage and thus violate the treaty. But what about a derelict spacecraft, like the Eagle, the Apollo 11 lunar lander? Do we really want to rely on "due regard" to prevent the intentional or inadvertent destruction of this inspiring piece of history? This object memorializes the work of the hundreds of thousands of individuals who worked to put a human on the moon, the astronauts and cosmonauts who gave their lives in this quest to reach the stars, and the quiet heroes, like Katherine Johnson, who fueled the math that made it so. The lunar landing sites -- from Luna 2, the first human-made object to impact the moon, to each of the crewed Apollo missions, to Chang-e 4, which deployed the first rover on the far side of the moon -- in particular bear witness to humanity's greatest technological achievement thus far. They symbolize all we have accomplished as a species, and hold such promise for the future. The One Small Step Act is true to its name. It's a small step. It applies only to companies that are working with NASA; it pertains only to US lunar landing sites; it implements outdated and untested recommendations to protect historic lunar sites implemented by NASA in 2011. However, it offers significant breakthroughs. It is the first legislation from any nation to recognize an off-Earth site as having "outstanding universal value" to humanity, language taken from the unanimously ratified World Heritage Convention. The act also encourages the development of best practices to protect human heritage in space by evolving the concepts of due regard and harmful interference -- an evolution that will also guide how nations and companies work around one another. As small a step as it may be, recognizing and protecting historic sites is the first step to developing a peaceful, sustainable and successful lunar governance model. The bootprints are not protected -- yet. There is a long way to go toward an enforceable multilateral/universal agreement to manage the protection, preservation or memorialization of all human heritage in space, but the One Small Step law should give us all hope for the future in space and here on Earth. READ MORE: Batmen and unicorns -- inside the original moon hoax © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

41 Harris swears in 3 new Democratic senators, flipping control of the Senate
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_2c55e1fe702b1e379d2448a964ac4e74
(CNN) - Vice President-elect Kamala Harris is expected to swear in three new, barrier-breaking Democratic senators on Wednesday afternoon after her own inauguration, officially giving Democrats control of the Senate for the first time since they lost the chamber in the 2014 elections. Earlier this month, Georgia elected two Democrats -- the Rev. Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff -- to the US Senate, flipping the chamber. Warnock, the senior pastor of Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, and Ossoff will be joined on Wednesday by Harris' successor, Alex Padilla, the former California secretary of state appointed to the Senate by Gov. Gavin Newsom.  The swearing-in of the three new senators will be groundbreaking. Warnock and Ossoff will be the first Black and first Jewish senators, respectively, representing Georgia, while Padilla will be California's first Latino senator.  Ossoff, 33, will also be the youngest senator in the chamber, and the youngest Democrat to serve in the Senate since President-elect Joe Biden, who was sworn into the chamber at the age of 30 in 1973. After Warnock, Ossoff and Padilla are sworn in, the party breakdown of the Senate will be 50-50.  Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer will become the first New Yorker and first Jewish lawmaker to become Senate majority leader. Harris will wield power as the Senate's crucial tie-breaking vote, helping the Biden administration confirm its appointments and giving Democrats the gavels of committees in charge of holding oversight hearings and crafting far-reaching legislation. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

42 Loss of smell drives Covid-19 survivors to get creative in the kitchen
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_4a8de9663ffd38bfd0585da626c3eedb
(CNN) - Emergency physician Dr. Alex Yeats had just whipped up what seemed like an appetizing dinner option when his wife let him know she wasn't having anything to do with it. "It was black bean pasta with almonds and turmeric chunks and I was like 'I'm not eating that, it's disgusting,'" said Sarah Yeats, 31, an emergency nurse from Atlantic Beach, Florida.  The couple both work at a hospital in Jacksonville, Florida, and she had contracted Covid-19 at work and brought it home in August. Like many people who have gotten the coronavirus, they noticed shortly after testing positive that they'd lost much of their sense of smell and taste.  For weeks, they'd been coaxing any sensation they could muster from foods by dousing chicken in lemon juice, throwing fistfuls of fresh herbs at soups and salads and getting daring with textures in an attempt to bring some excitement to the table.  The day Sarah noticed she no longer found turmeric chunks acceptable atop pasta, she said, was when she realized her sense of taste might be rebounding.  Anosmia — a condition known as "smell blindness," or loss of smell — is a common symptom of Covid-19 (and other viruses), and can severely impact people's ability to taste, since the senses are intertwined.  "It appears that loss of smell or taste are some of the most specific indicators of Covid-19, in particular early indicators," said emergency physician and CNN Medical Analyst Dr. Leana Wen. "Even without having any other symptoms, including congestion, (Covid-19 patients) report that they cannot smell or taste." And while most people regain their sense of smell or taste within days to weeks, Wen said, "there are still many who have not regained their sense of smell after months."  People still need to eat, of course, and they're modifying their meals as a result. Putting new flavor combinations on the table A few days after testing positive for the virus in mid-December, Althea Mullarkey, 53, suddenly realized she could no longer smell the strong gardenia scent of her shampoo.  She tore through the house, sniffing everything she could find, and realized her sense of smell had vanished. The self-described foodie who lives in New York's Hudson Valley said she no longer likes the mouthfeel of eggs, since she can't taste them. And she doesn't want to waste her blunted sense of taste on a good piece of blue cheese, a former favorite. Recently, Mullarkey said, she ate leftover "spicy-sweet coleslaw with pulled pork" for breakfast. Her go-to dinner has become lemon-dill hummus squeezed with more lemon, a side of pitted kalamata olives and a piece of toasted naan slathered with spicy oil. "I can taste the salt and pepper and lemon and I like the crispy textures," Mullarkey said, but none of the layers of flavors she used to love experimenting with in the kitchen are coming through.  There is a simple explanation for that, said Dr. Marta Becker, an otolaryngologist with Philadelphia-based BergerHenry ENT Specialty Group, who's part of a team developing an app for long-haul Covid-19 patients to track their symptoms. "Some sensations of our food — spicy hot pepper, mintiness — are things we experience with the hot and cold sensors of our mouth," she said. "You can get the acid, heat, even saltiness, but not the layers of things like cilantro and chipotle." Most of our sense of what we think of as taste, Becker said, isn't really taste at all. "All the interesting things about our food that we use to identify things like cheese and fruits and chocolate and coffee are not done with our mouth," she said. "They're done with our nose." "We don't think it's very common for people to actually lose their sense of taste (with Covid-19). If you really drill down, it's the olfactory function in the nose that's not working." That might explain why texture, color and even rituals around cooking have become more important to some people right now. "Texture has become a lot more important to me," said Alex Yeats, 42. He and Sarah eat salmon several times a week because it has a fuller, more umami body and a better mouthfeel than a flaky white fish, which "just tastes dry."  "I wanted to make sure there was green in everything," Sarah said. "Foods that are white and gray, they're just so unappealing now." Immersing in the processes of cooking and meal planning each week also helped her keep interested in food prep. "Having Covid inspired us to use our raclette oven because it's a process for cooking that makes it fun."  When odd odors are a promising sign  Phantom smells are a common topic in online Covid-19 support groups. Even months since their diagnoses, the couple have gotten whiffs of jet fuel and cigarette smoke where there was none. Mullarkey said she has smelled such intense phantom smoke and ash odors, they've nearly made her gag. According to Becker, that's promising news. "A lot of people get trash, or smoke, something rotten or burning rubber," Becker said of phantom smells her patients have noted. "It's really gross, but it's usually a good sign things are trying to sort themselves out. When recovery happens, sometimes the wires can get crossed." While it's still unknown why people lose their sense of smell with Covid-19, Wen said "it's thought that the coronavirus doesn't affect nerve cells that control smell but rather the cells around them."  That, too, is considered good news for recovery, since supporting cells regenerate easier than neurons. "When the cells grow back, it might take some time and retraining to get back to normal," she said.  Scent training can help  Retraining her sense of smell is something that Kaya Cheshire — who said she's still missing 90% of her sense of smell since contracting a mild case of Covid-19 last July — has been trying out, along with adding far more herbs and spices than usual to her food.  "I really miss smell," said Cheshire, 28, who lives in London and is head of marketing for WorkClub. She said she'd have Covid-19 "five times" to get her smell back.  "It's so nostalgic to smell food cooking," she said. "Adding lemon or cloves and those aromatic things enhance everything and make me feel like I'm not missing out as much — even though I know I am."  At her doctor's suggestion, Cheshire recently began "scent training," using things like rose, lemons, cloves, garlic, eucalyptus and menthols that have a really strong smell to retrain her brain.  "I'm trying to think about how things used to smell so I can remember them and recognize that scent again," she said.  Becker said it's a tactic she recommends to patients since there is no cure for anosmia. "Retraining your brain to what things smell like so you can remember is a bit mysterious," she said. "But using the memory to retrain the neurons can work in both directions. The memory can help you smell, and the smell can help you remember." And you don't need a fancy essential oils kit, she said. "Just use the things you have to match that smell up with the memory of your smell." That could be something aromatic and nostalgic for dinner, too. Sarah Yeats — who has recovered most of her sense of smell and taste, but not all — recently made a bowl of ramen brimming with cilantro and green onions in a rich broth.  "I'm trying to serve foods that seem more flavorful and look prettier," she said. For her husband, Alex, the dish was a form of memory itself.  "Since I remember what it smells and tastes like, I can imagine it, and it's helpful," he said.  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

43 For many parents, the swearing-in of Kamala Harris was an inspirational teaching moment for their kids
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_bb8dec2d0d69d67087688a01a13a9a47
(CNN) - The moment Kamala Harris took her oath of office on Wednesday to become the first female, first Black and first South Asian vice president was an inspirational teaching moment for parents and kids across the country.  Harris stood proudly on the steps of the US Capitol as she was sworn in by Sonia Sotomayor, the country's first Latina Supreme Court justice. The groundbreaking event was celebrated by many families, who shared photos of their daughters and sons witnessing history on social media. "My daughters, watching history, and learning there should be NO LIMIT to what they can do. Thank you #KamalaHarris" wrote Lynell Miller in a post to Twitter with a photo of her girls sharing an embrace. Miller told CNN the last year has been full of so many teachable moments for her children, and Inauguration Day was a day to learn about grace, hope and potential. "It means that I can be an astronaut when I grow up," said Miller's 6-year-old daughter Eleanor.  Three generations of women in Gary Williams Jr. family sat together to watch Harris take her oath."This is what it's about. Three generations. My mother, my wife, and my daughter watching history," wrote Gary Williams to Twitter. "A Black woman being sworn in as Vice President of the United States of America. Thank you @KamalaHarris and congratulations!" Sarah Johnson said her son Uly was excited to watch the moment. "Overjoyed my five-year-old son got a half day to watch the inauguration and even more overjoyed that he'll grow up with @KamalaHarris as the VP! #WomenInLeadership" she wrote to Twitter. Johnson said it's important for her to raise a son who sees strong women in leadership, especially strong women of color in leadership. "I think it makes all of us better and our country better, "she said.  Dr. Rachelle Winkle-Wagner held her daughters close as they watched with excited grins. "One of my top parenting moments was today -- seeing Kamala Harris being sworn in by Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor with my two daughters," she wrote in a post to Twitter.  Winkle-Wagner told CNN the moment allowed her to feel connected to generations of women from all backgrounds who fought for women's rights. Her oldest daughter, Eleanor, said seeing Harris take the oath of office was the moment she knew that she could run for president.  "Watching #inaugurationday playing with my brown US citizen son has been truly special #kamalaharris" wrote Gunjan Manocha, a first-generation immigrant from India, who is raising her son with her husband in the US.  "Today's ceremony gives people like us hope," she told CNN. "People with daughters, people with son's of color, people raising their kids to be better decent human beings." Adina Davidson's daughter, Aaliyah, watched closely as Harris was sworn in. "Madam Vice Present. We see you," she wrote in a post to Instagram.  "As a mother it meant that my daughter would not just hear me tell her she can be anything she wants to, if she puts her mind to it," Davidson told CNN. "She will actually be able to see it for herself." © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

44 Trump's last-minute pardons include Bannon, Lil Wayne and scores of others
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_f3265fe7c5ace3ee6965fc2a5256991d
(CNN) - President Donald Trump issued a raft of 11th-hour pardons and commutations early Wednesday that included his onetime political strategist, a former top fundraiser and two well-known rappers but not himself or his family. The batch of 73 pardons and 70 commutations issued in the final hours of his presidency was expected, and is in keeping with a long-standing presidential tradition of exercising clemency powers at the last minute. The list reflected a President keen on awarding pardons to his stalwart allies, an unusual number of whom have been swept up in corruption or lying charges. The vast majority of the pardons and commutations on Trump's list were doled out to individuals whose cases have been championed by criminal justice reform advocates, including people serving lengthy sentences for low-level offenses. But several controversial names do appear, including Steve Bannon, who has pleaded not guilty to charges he defrauded donors in a "We Build the Wall" online fundraising campaign. Trump had spent the past days deliberating over a pardon for the man who helped him win the presidency in 2016 and followed him to the White House. During his final hours in office there was a frantic debate underway behind the scenes on whether to grant Bannon a pardon. One concern was Bannon's possible connection to the January 6 riot of Trump supporters at the US Capitol, according to a source familiar with the discussions. Over the course of Tuesday, Trump continued to contemplate pardons that aides believed were settled, including for his former strategist. The President continued to go back and forth on it into Tuesday night, sources told CNN. Other names included Tuesday were Elliott Broidy, a former top fundraiser for Trump's campaign who pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy relating to a secret lobbying campaign to influence the Trump administration on behalf of a foreign billionaire in exchange for millions of dollars. The rapper Lil Wayne received a pardon after pleading guilty to a gun possession charge in Miami. Another rapper, Kodak Black, received a commutation after he pleaded guilty to a weapons charge. Trump also offered clemency to Paul Erickson, the conservative political operative and ex-boyfiend of alleged Russian spy Maria Butina, who pleaded guilty to wire fraud and money laundering charges; Robin Hayes, a North Carolina political donor convicted of trying to bribe officials; Former Detroit Mayor Kwame Kilpatrick, convicted of federal charges including racketeering, extortion and the filing of false tax returns; William Walters, a professional sports gambler convicted of insider trading; and Aviem Sella, an Israeli air force officer who the US accused of being a spy. Bob Zangrillo, the Miami developer and venture capitalist charged in the Varsity Blues college admission scandal, also received a pardon. None of the other parents caught up in the probe were pardoned. Though neither Trump or members of his family were included on his list, Trump has until noon on Wednesday to issue any final pardons before leaving office. Last-minute scramble Trump's final acts of clemency come after a scramble in recent days among criminal justice reform advocates and several White House officials to finalize the list and convince Trump to approve the actions. These pardons will undoubtedly be overshadowed by the slew of controversial ones Trump also issue in the same final batch on Tuesday. While outgoing presidents typically issue pardons before leaving office, Trump has proven more willing to use his pardon power to brazenly reward political loyalty, the wealthy and well-connected and those who did not cooperate with special counsel Robert Mueller's investigation. The January 6 riots that led to Trump's second impeachment have complicated his desire to pardon himself, his kids and personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani, and a source close to the process said those are no longer expected.  After the riot, advisers encouraged Trump to forgo a self-pardon because it would appear like he was guilty of something, according to one person familiar with the conversations. Several of Trump's closest advisers have also urged him not to grant clemency to anyone involved in the siege on the US Capitol, despite Trump's initial stance that those involved had done nothing wrong.  Refocus on pardons After weeks focusing on contesting the election and reeling from the fallout of the January 6 insurrection, Trump finally snapped back to attention on pardons in recent days, one source said.  "You couldn't get the President to focus on this," a source close to the process said of Trump in recent weeks. "And then this weekend, he didn't have his Twitter, he didn't have all these other distractions." Trump, who sank deeper into lame duck status in recent weeks, was reminded that his pardon power is one of the remaining undiminished aspects of his presidential power. This source said Trump also resonated with cases in which individuals who went to trial got significantly more prison time than co-defendants who cooperated with law enforcement.  "I don't think he likes when people get screwed just because they go to trial," this source said. While Jared Kushner has been closely involved in pardons throughout his time at the White House, this source said that Ivanka Trump became much more closely involved in the push for pardons in recent days. Together, Kushner and Ivanka Trump worked with the White House counsel's office and Justice Department while also working to convince Trump to support a series of clemency actions in the vein of criminal justice reform. After meetings this weekend, Trump met again with his daughter, son-in-law and other White House officials on Monday to finalize the list of clemency actions. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

45 Trump grants clemency to rappers Lil Wayne and Kodak Black in final flurry of presidential power
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_ebbe97d6eb21c589aaf23baf059e39ce
(CNN) - The White House announced early Wednesday that President Donald Trump has granted a pardon to rapper Lil Wayne and a commutation to rapper Kodak Black, two of the raft of pardons and commutations on his final day in office.  "President Trump granted a full pardon to Dwayne Michael Carter Jr., also known as 'Lil Wayne,'" the statement from White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany read. "Mr. Carter pled guilty to possession of a firearm and ammunition by a convicted felon, owing to a conviction over 10 years ago. Brett Berish of Sovereign Brands, who supports a pardon for Mr. Carter, describes him as 'trustworthy, kind-hearted and generous.'"   "Mr. Carter has exhibited this generosity through commitment to a variety of charities, including donations to research hospitals and a host of foodbanks. Deion Sanders, who also wrote in support of this pardon, calls Mr. Wayne 'a provider for his family, a friend to many, a man of faith, a natural giver to the less fortunate, a waymaker, [and] a game changer.'" The decisions mark another example of Trump rewarding someone he perceives as loyal. Trump, who has been largely lambasted by Hollywood during his tenure in office, has relished praise from celebrities and is rewarding the rapper, also known as Dwayne Carter, who expressed support for his campaign in the final days of the 2020 campaign. Lil Wayne, a multi-platinum artist and record label founder who has won five Grammys, pleaded guilty to illegal gun possession on December 11, 2020, after a December 2019 arrest, and was facing up to 10 years in federal prison as he awaited his sentencing later this month.  The guilty plea came weeks after he met with Trump in Miami, Florida, to discuss the President's "platinum plan" aimed at courting Black voters days before the election.  "Just had a great meeting with @realdonaldtrump," Lil Wayne said in a tweet after the October 29 meeting, posting a photo alongside Trump, both men smiling with thumbs up.  He added, "Besides what he's done so far with criminal reform, the platinum plan is going to give the community real ownership. He listened to what we had to say today and assured he will and can get it done." The meeting was set up after Carter's team reached out to the White House, press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said.  Like Trump, who called the Black Lives Matter movement a "symbol of hate" and railed against nationwide protests amid a national reckoning on systemic racism, Lil Wayne has a controversial history of his own remarks on social justice, telling ABC News in 2016 that he did not feel connected to the Black Lives Matter movement.  "I don't feel connected to a damn thing that ain't got nothin' to do with me," he said at the time.  Lil Wayne had been charged with criminal possession of a firearm and ammunition as a prior felony offender. Prosecutors said the gold-plated, .45-caliber handgun carried in a bag on a private flight was loaded. He was arrested in December 2019 as he arrived on a flight from California at the Opa Locka Executive Airport near Miami. Officers spoke with the rapper, who told them that he had a gun in his bag, officials said. He had previously pleaded guilty in October 2009 to a felony gun charge as part of a deal with New York prosecutors. That charge stemmed from his arrest in 2007 outside of New York City's Beacon Theater in which a .40-caliber pistol was found on his tour bus. He accepted a plea agreement and was sentenced to a year in prison, serving eight months before being released. Kodak Black -- who was raised in Pompano Beach, Florida, and whose breakout hit "Tunnel Vision" became his first top 10 song on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart -- has been arrested multiple times and faced gun, drug and sexual misconduct charges. Kodak Black, whose real name is Bill Kapri, was sentenced to more than three years in prison on weapons charges in November 2019. He pleaded guilty in August 2019 to knowingly making false written statements when trying to acquire firearms from a federally licensed firearms dealer. US District Judge Federico Moreno in Miami sentenced Kapri to 46 months in prison, followed by three years of supervised release.  In April 2019, he was arrested on separate gun and drug charges near Niagara Falls, New York, while trying to enter the US from Canada. Kapri faced allegations of criminal possession of a weapon second degree and unlawful possession of marijuana. He pleaded guilty in that case in March. The sentence was to be served concurrently with the case out of Miami. Kapri was also indicted by a grand jury in South Carolina in 2016, accused of first-degree criminal sexual conduct. "Kodak Black is a prominent artist and community leader," McEnany said in the statement.  "He has served nearly half of his sentence. Before his conviction and after reaching success as a recording artist, Kodak Black became deeply involved in numerous philanthropic efforts. In fact, he has committed to supporting a variety of charitable efforts, such as providing educational resources to students and families of fallen law enforcement officers and the underprivileged. In addition to these efforts, he has paid for the notebooks of school children, provided funding and supplies to daycare centers, provided food for the hungry, and annually provides for underprivileged children during Christmas. Most recently while still incarcerated, Kodak Black donated $50,000 to David Portnoy's Barstool Fund, which provides funds to small businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Kodak Black's only request was that his donation go toward restaurants in his hometown." © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

46 Opinion: The worst of Trump's pardons
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_b1422c3cd67ceccc42c19660342ed191
Editor's Note: Elie Honig is a CNN legal analyst and former federal and state prosecutor. The views expressed in this commentary are his own. Read more opinion on CNN. Watch Honig answer readers' questions on "CNN Newsroom with Ana Cabrera" on weekends. (CNN) - In his final full day in office, President Donald Trump refrained from the most outrageous possible abuses of the pardon power. Perhaps wary of causing political backlash, given his impending Senate impeachment trial, Trump has not pardoned himself, his children or his personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani.   But make no mistake: With his final batch of 73 pardons and 70 sentence commutations, Trump offered up one last burst of cronyism and self-dealing. While Trump issued pardons to several recipients whose cases had been rightly advocated by criminal justice reform groups, he also doled out free passes to an unseemly lineup of criminals who apparently have been granted mercy based largely on their personal connections to Trump, their wealth and access or their status as celebrity objects of fascination. This is, needless to say, not how pardons are supposed to work. The best way to understand Trump's abuse of the pardon power is by comparing his actions to those of his immediate predecessors. President Barack Obama issued far more pardons and commutations than Trump has. But the vast majority of Obama's grants of leniency went to nonviolent drug offenders who had received harsh prison sentences and to whom Obama had no personal or political connections -- while Trump's pardons have gone largely to his own political and personal allies and other well-connected recipients. President George W. Bush wrote that he was taken aback by the last-minute blitz of pardon requests from well-connected individuals during his final days in office. Bush resolved not to grant any such requests but rather to consider only those pardon applications that had been vetted by the Justice Department's Office of the Pardon Attorney (who traditionally provides nonbinding guidance to the President to ensure that pardons are properly vetted and equitable). In contrast, Trump has largely ignored the pardon attorney.  Here's a rundown of the most odious of the pardons and commutations that Trump granted in his final hours, in his own version of Pardongate: Steve Bannon. Bannon brazenly ripped off Trump's own most ardent followers who donated to a scam called "We Build the Wall," federal prosecutors said. Bannon allegedly defrauded donors of hundreds of thousands of dollars they'd given to that fund and used the money for his own lavish personal lifestyle. Now, Trump has let Bannon off the hook, while hanging his own most fervent supporters out to dry.  Elliott Broidy. The former Republican Party and Trump fundraiser pleaded guilty to secretly lobbying the US government on behalf of Chinese and Malaysian interests. The Justice Department previously had declared that Broidy's conduct "poses a serious threat to our national security and undermines the integrity of our democracy."  He, too, gets a free pass.   Kwame Kilpatrick. The infamously corrupt former mayor of Detroit had his sentence commuted by the President because, according to the White House news release, he "has taught public speaking classes and has led Bible Study groups with his fellow inmates." That's it. That's the entire rationale.   Paul Erickson. Convicted of wire fraud and money laundering as an offshoot of special counsel Robert Mueller's investigation of Russian interference in the 2016 election, Erickson received a pardon seemingly solely because his case had some connection to Mueller. The White House news release focuses not on Erickson's conduct ("a minor financial crime," it said) but solely on the specious and overwrought claim that this "pardon helps right the wrongs of what has been revealed to be perhaps the greatest witch hunt in American History." The closest comparison for Trump's endgame pardon blitz happened on President Bill Clinton's last day in office in January 2001, when Clinton doled out over 130 pardons to a group that included his personal and political allies, political donors and his own half-brother. Clinton's actions became known as Pardongate and prompted a federal criminal investigation (which did not result in charges). We'll see if Trump's closing flurry of pardons will bring a similar response. Now, your questions: Gary (New Mexico): Can the Senate hold an impeachment trial after the president leaves office on January 20? Yes. There is historical precedent for impeaching and trying a federal official after he has left office. On March 2, 1876, Secretary of War William Belknap resigned under political pressure. Later that day, the House impeached Belknap. Then, in August 1876, the Senate held Belknap's impeachment trial (and ultimately acquitted him). Common sense leads to the same result. Article I of the Constitution permits Congress to disqualify an officer from holding future office. What happens, then, if a president commits an egregious act on his last full day in office, January 19? There would not be time to impeach and formally try and convict that president before he leaves office at noon the next day. So, the only practical way to effectuate the Constitution's disqualification provision is by holding impeachment proceedings after the president has left office. Jack (Michigan): Can the President still issue pardons, even now that he has been impeached?    Yes, but the confusion here is understandable. Article II of the Constitution provides that the President "shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States, except in cases of impeachment."  The language here is ambiguous. Read one way, it could appear to say that after the President is impeached by the House, he loses the power to issue pardons. But read another way, it says that the President can issue pardons for criminal offenses but not for impeachment.   The latter reading is correct. There is no provision anywhere in the Constitution, statutes or case law that strips a President of any power solely upon impeachment by the House (though, of course, if convicted in the Senate, the President loses the office and all of its powers).  It would be anomalous for the President to lose only one power -- the power to pardon -- upon impeachment alone.  Indeed, all three Presidents who have been impeached -- Andrew Johnson, Bill Clinton and Trump (the first time) -- issued many pardons after their impeachments. Rather, the clause in Article II means that while a President can pardon an official (or any person) for a crime, he cannot pardon an official out of impeachment. In other words, the President does not have power to un-impeach. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

47 Opinion: Why Trump can't legally pardon himself
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_651f477c2a2bfed75a68a125bb111ae5
Editor's Note: David Gray Adler is a constitutional law scholar and president of The Alturas Institute, a non-profit organization created to advance American democracy by promoting the Constitution, gender equality, civic education and equal protection of the law. He is co-author, most recently, of "The War Power in an Age of Terrorism." The views expressed here are solely his. View more opinion articles on CNN. (CNN) - President Donald Trump's hypothetical option of granting himself a pardon before leaving office effectively ended when the House of Representatives opened debate on a single article of impeachment, charging "incitement of insurrection," and voted to impeach him in a bipartisan vote of 232-197 on January 13.   The Pardon Clause of the Constitution, Article 2, Section 1, provides that the President may grant pardons for offenses against the United States "except in Cases of impeachment." This clause bars a president from pardoning anyone — including himself — who is the subject of impeachment once debate on offenses set forth in the articles of impeachment begins.  This constitutional limitation on the pardon power reflects the deep influence of English legal history on the framers' drafting of the impeachment and pardon clauses. The framers, keenly aware of the 17th Century clashes between King and Parliament on the scope of those powers, were determined to protect the power of impeachment from executive encroachment through the exercise of authority to grant pardons. Although the restrictions in the Pardon Clause seem to refer only to specific offenses being addressed in the impeachment proceedings, the English law background and history provide an overwhelming case against a presidential self-pardoning authority on any basis.    The framers' position on the pardon and impeachment powers was fashioned by a pivotal episode in English legal history, one riddled with convulsions and crises, in the century-long battle between King and Parliament over two foundational powers that shaped the evolution of English law. It was a case in which the King's grant of a pardon to another was actually an attempt to absolve his own misdeeds.     In 1678, Parliament was outraged by the discovery of surreptitious maneuvers by the Earl of Danby, the trusted Lord Treasurer serving England's King Charles II, to tilt England's foreign policy toward France and to solicit a pension, that is, a bribe, from King Louis XIV to pay Charles II, as part of a design to restore the influence of Roman Catholicism in England -- a move that offended the sentiments and violated the policies of Parliament.       Lord Danby was serving King Charles II, who had laid out the scheme and provided his chief minister with instructions to follow. Danby's downfall was set in motion when he wrote a letter to Ralph Montague, an English courtier and middleman for the arrangement with King Louis. This letter bore Danby's signature, and when it became public, the House of Commons was infuriated.    Parliament had no legal authority to impeach the King himself, so lawmakers launched impeachment proceedings against Danby instead. Danby was impeached for "High Treason and other High Crimes, Misdemeanours and Offences." Charles, anxious to protect his loyal aide, tried to block the impeachment by marching to the House of Lords and declared that he had authorized Danby's acts, that he had granted a pardon to Danby, and that Danby had been dismissed.  Parliament, however, would have none of this. Sir Francis Winnington, a former Solicitor General regarded by historians as a great lawyer, immediately grasped the existential threat to the impeachment power. He justly stated, "An impeachment is of no purpose when a pardon shall stop our mouths." For a nation in which executive accountability was still in its nascent stage, monarchical pardon to derail impeachment would not be tolerated. In a century replete with constitutional crises between the Commons and the Crown, Charles had no stomach for another. He voluntarily withdrew his pardon of Danby, who was sent to the Tower of London, where he was held for five years. The legal and political convulsions that engulfed the Danby Affair were brought to an unceremonious end when King Charles dismissed Parliament. This refusal by Parliament to accept King Charles' pardon of Danby, followed two decades later with the enactment of the historic Settlement Act of 1700 barring the pleading of a pardon to an impeachment, left an indelible impression on the framers of the Constitution. Pennsylvania's Gouverneur Morris invoked the Danby scandal in the 1787 Constitutional Convention to punctuate his, and fellow delegates', fear that the "president could be bribed to betray his trust."     If the English Parliament had accepted the pardon, the King would have been free to screen ministers from parliamentary inquiry and impeachment — and thus put himself beyond the reach of Parliament. For members of the House of Commons who viewed the impeachment power as a means to preserve government and bring corrupt ministers to heel, the act of executive clemency could not be tolerated.  The framers of the American Constitution were not about to allow their own newly minted executive a power denied to the King of England. There is no mention of self-pardons in the records of the debates in the Constitutional Convention or evidence of any discussion of such authority in the Federalist Papers, anti-Federalist Papers, or any document contemporaneous with the framing of the Constitution. The very suggestion of such authority would have triggered accusations of monarchical sympathies.     It's a fair bet that the notion that a specific constitutional prohibition against executive self-pardon would ever be required was a failure of the framers' imagination. When Charles II's father, Charles I, was sentenced to death in the High Court of Justice, in 1649, for treason, murder and other crimes of tyranny, he denied up until his beheading that the court had any jurisdictional authority over the monarch. But in the long sweep of English history, neither he nor any other monarch ever claimed the power to self-pardon.     The framers of the Constitution vested in the US President less, not  more, power than that attributed to the King. But let's say that Trump, having flouted the norms so many times before, does attempt to pardon himself for any crimes he might have committed outside the purview of the ban on impeachment-related pardons.   Such a self-pardon will have limited utility given the sorts of legal challenges that Trump may be forced to confront. A presidential  pardon does not extend to state offenses, which means he could still face charges arising from state and city investigations currently being conducted in New York.    The Supreme Court has made clear that constitutional adjudication often requires resort to historical arguments, claims and practices. Lacking a textual statement in the Constitution of a presidential authority to self-pardon, and lacking even a scintilla of evidence in Anglo-American legal history to support the existence of such a staggering power, or any assertion to that effect by just one delegate to the convention, Trump's premise of a self-pardon should be as risible to strict and loose constructionists on any court as his assertion that the President is endowed with "absolute" power.    And when Trump effectively tried to assert absolute power in Washington on January 6 by inciting his followers to overturn an election, he triggered the unpardonable impeachment charges that should -- if all else fails -- be a slam-dunk in a court of law. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

48 4 ways Joe Biden plans to fix the economy
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_81ba51f5c0f4e5a6fecb89aca95e4251
New York  (CNN Business) - Joe Biden will be sworn in as president at noon Wednesday. During his campaign, he made sweeping promises to restore the economy and speed up the recovery from the pandemic.  Here are some of the policies he plans to institute to get Americans back to work, boost the number of jobs, increase racial equity and raise taxes, with an aim of reopening the economy. Covid-19 response Biden's plan for Day One, as detailed on on his campaign website, aims at getting the Covid-19 crisis under control. It calls for doubling the number of drive-thru testing sites around the nation, investing in at-home tests and hiring at least 100,000 Americans to perform contact-tracing. He also wants to invest $25 billion into vaccine manufacturing and distribution, with the goal of getting a vaccine to every American at no cost. The plan also involves providing funds to state and local governments so they can avoid budget shortfalls, and asking Congress to help schools with Covid-19 resources and covering part of Covid-19 related costs for small businesses. Inequality Biden said he won't raise taxes on people earning less than $400,000 a year. But he plans to raise revenue in the following ways:      • Raise the top income tax rate to 39.6%, where it was during President Barack Obama's administration, from the current 37%
     • Raise the corporate tax rate to 28% from 21%
     • Require American companies to pay a minimum tax of 21% on foreign income
     • Institute a tax penalty on companies that move jobs overseas but continue to sell products back to America
     • Require a 15% tax on book income for companies
     • Anyone making over $1 million per year would be taxed at the same rate for investment income as they are on their wages Biden also said he wants to expand the child tax credit to help working families during the pandemic to give parents $3,000 per year for each child between the ages of 6 to 17, and $3,600 per child under age 6. He plans to expand access to refundable health premium tax credits, up to $8,000 annually in tax credits to help pay for child care.  A study from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania projects Biden's tax plan would raise revenue by $2.3 to $2.6 trillion over the next 10 years with little impact on GDP. Jobs Biden plans to create "at least 5 million" new manufacturing jobs. He wants to invest $400 billion in procurement investment -- processes such as supply chains -- that drive demand for American products and services, and $300 billion in research and development in tech including artificial intelligence and 5G. The federal minimum wage, which is currently $7.25, would be raised to at least $15 an hour. As part of his jobs plan, Biden also wants to invest $70 billion in historically Black colleges and universities and Tribal schools, a move that includes a host of initiatives including scholarships and new facilities.  As for clean energy, his administration would purchase billions of dollars worth of clean vehicles and products and require countries that aren't environmentally friendly to pay a carbon adjustment tax. Another priority in Biden's plans is promoting racial equity. He's said he will fund state and local investment initiatives for Black and Brown entrepreneurs, as well as provide up of $100 billion in low-interest business loans to Black and Brown communities through state and local lending programs. Student loans Biden is calling for $10,000 of each student's federal student loan debt to be canceled immediately as part of the pandemic relief response. An additional $10,000 of student loan debt will be forgiven for every year of community service performed by individuals for up to five years, under Biden's plan. He also wants to double the maximum amount of Pell grants and increase the number of students who can access to financial aid, while halving federal student loan payments. Those who attended historically Black colleges or minority-serving institutions and earn up to $125,000 should have all debt forgiven, according to Biden, and the schools would be made tuition-free for students whose families' incomes are below $125,000. Additional proposals Biden also plans to adopt Elizabeth Warren's bankruptcy reform proposal, which would streamline the bankruptcy proceeding and allow people filing for bankruptcy to set aside funds for childcare and items like toys and books. He also wants to expand worker protection rights and make it easier for workers to join unions without employers forcing them into mandatory meetings or impeding negotiations. Biden is looking to eliminate private dollars from federal elections through a constitutional amendment, according to his website, which would require candidates to rely on public dollars alone for their campaigns. He's also calling for a law that would keep foreign nationals from influencing American elections and create more transparency on election spending, so that an ad on Facebook would be required to disclose its donors. On the infrastructure front, Biden will propose a $1.3 trillion plan over 10 years aimed at making American middle-class workers more competitive on a global scale, push the US to adopt more clean energy processes and grow the economy. As to how these overhauls will be paid for, Biden said reversing Trump's tax cuts will offset some of the costs of the plan.  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

49 The Biden post-election market surge is the best for a new president in modern history
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_8b4244a2f92e7fd1d8f1d2f703d692e8
New York  (CNN Business) - Stocks have gained about 13% since Election Day as of Tuesday, a day before Joe Biden's inauguration — marking the the best post-election market performance for a new president in modern history, according to CFRA Research. The second-biggest surge was from late 1960 to early 1961, when John F. Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon, and the S&P 500 rose 8.8%. The market continued to rally during JFK's first 100 days in office, rising another 8.9%. The current Biden market surge represents the second time in a row that Wall Street has cheered a new president: Stocks gained more than 6% in the election to inauguration period after Donald Trump beat Hillary Clinton in 2016. The market gained 5% during Trump's first 100 days as well. But there's one major difference: Trump was inheriting an economy that was growing at a stable rate during the long, post-Great Recession recovery. Biden is walking into the Covid-19 economy. Investors seem hopeful that Biden, along with a Democrat-controlled House and Senate, will work with Republicans to quickly pass another stimulus bill.  The stimulus expectations, combined with the fact that Americans are starting to receive coronavirus vaccinations, has fueled hopes that the economy -- and corporate earnings -- will improve later this year.   Oil, banks and small cap stocks getting a bigger Biden boost To that end, the energy and financial sectors have been the best performers since the election. Oil companies should benefit from an improving economy and rising crude prices, while banks often do better when there is increased demand for loans.  Small cap stocks have also outperformed the S&P 500, a move that makes sense considering that smaller companies have more exposure to the US economy compared to the large multinational firms that dominate the Dow and S&P 500. The Biden boost is also in stark contrast to how stocks performed the previous two instances a new president was coming into power during tumultuous economic times. The S&P 500 fell more than 6% in late 2000 and early 2001 after George W. Bush defeated Al Gore. That election was contested as well, adding to uncertainty that was already present in the market as a result of the dot-com bubble bursting earlier in 2000. And stocks plummeted nearly 20% from November 2008 through mid-January 2009 after Biden's former boss Barack Obama defeated the late John McCain. Investors were still extremely nervous about the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the rash of high profile bank failures at the time. But experts say investors need to realize that market performance between the election and the inauguration is not necessarily a harbinger of things to come for the rest of the year. CFRA Research chief investment strategist Sam Stovall noted in the report that "the S&P 500 is overdue for a digestion of gains that could push the index value below its 2020 closing level." In other words, the rest of the year might be bumpy. But any downturns could be brief: Stovall also predicted that any market pullbacks in 2021 will be "set early enough in the year to allow for time to recoup all losses and go on to set even higher highs."  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

50 Joe Biden's proposed stimulus checks are a lousy way to fix the economy
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_bcd0156826f29cc5ba47dd2e1253b079
New York  (CNN Business) - The most expensive provision in Joe Biden's $1.9 trillion economic recovery plan is his proposal to send an additional $1,400 to most Americans. According to many economists, that's the least effective way to help revive the economy. The added stimulus is born out of widespread support among Congressional Democrats, and many Republicans, including outgoing President Donald Trump, to increase the direct payments from the most recent Covid-19 economic relief package from $600 to $2,000.  "Six hundred dollars is simply not enough if you still have to choose between paying rent and putting food on the table," Biden said when unveiling his economic recovery plan. "Even for those who have kept their jobs, these checks are really important." Targeting the wrong people The problem with the direct payments, according to economists and others critical of the plan, is that much of the stimulus would go to individuals who have not been financially hurt by the Covid-19 pandemic. That means those added dollars may not do much to boost economic activity. The $1,400 checks would go to most everyone who makes less than $75,000. Taxpayers filing joint returns who earn less than $150,000 would also qualify. Those earning more could qualify for lesser amounts, with a cap of $87,000 for individual tax filers to be eligible. "That money is not well targeted," said Mark Zandi, chief economist for Moody's Analytics.  Zandi said the only economic argument for the checks is that they are a politically feasible way to get a lot of cash into the economy fairly quickly. "Politics matter, and speed is more important than to get it exactly right," he said. "But I think it's the second or third best policy. It's certainly not the most effective way to help out." Many won't spend it The money could be a lifeline for struggling taxpayers. But one of the biggest problems, according to economists, is many who receive the checks will either put the money into savings or use it to pay down debt, neither of which will do much to increase overall economic activity. "The accepted theory of household behavior is that a one-time payment does little to spur additional spending," said Joel Prakken, Chief US Economist at IHS Markit. "People who do spend it will do so on purchases that aren't likely to be repeated. It's getting harder to argue it'll be an immediate stimulus to the economy."  A big part of the challenge with maintaining consumer spending during the pandemic has been that many of the goods and services people spend money on in "normal" times aren't available because of the crisis. "Given that lots of the hole [in spending] was not from the fact that people don't want to spend, but that they can't spend because they can't take a flight or they can't go to a restaurant," said Larry Summers, in a recent interview on Bloomberg. Summers served as a top economist in the early days of the Obama administration. "I don't necessarily think the priority should be on promoting consumer spending beyond where we are now."  Although Summers has been a supporter of direct payments in the past, he is skeptical that the proposal will be effective this time. "I'm not even sure I'm that enthusiastic about the $600 checks," he said. "And I think taking them to $2,000 would be a pretty serious mistake." Difficult politics There is a chance that Biden's proposal for the additional $1,400 payments won't be approved.  The additional round of stimulus would cost the government $465 billion, according to the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. That's roughly $100 billion more than is proposed for increased unemployment benefits.  Most experts believe that the full $1.9 trillion package has little chance of becoming law, and is likely to be passed in some scaled back form. In addition to bipartisan support for the checks, there is also bipartisan opposition. Among the leading Democratic critics is Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia. "I'm on board helping people that need help. People that can't make it. People that don't have jobs, they can't put food on the table," Manchin told CNN in a recent interview. "Sending checks to people who basically already have a check, and who aren't going to spend it, who are putting it in their savings account right now, that's not who we are. We have done an awful lot of that. It's time now to target where that money goes." Sen. Mitch McConnell, who will be the minority leader in the new Democratic-controlled Senate, said he also opposes another round of stimulus checks despite support from some members of his caucus. "It's no secret that Republicans have a diversity of views on the wisdom of borrowing hundreds of billions more non-targeted money, including to many households that have suffered no loss of income during the crisis," he said in recent remarks in the Senate. "It's hardly clear that the federal government's top priority should be sending thousands of dollars to, for example, a childless couple making well into six figures who have been comfortably teleworking all year. Our duty is to get help to the people who need help." © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

51 Biden seeks to extend bans on evictions and foreclosures
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_62201e778e3026a9ff76862ccb6b0925
(CNN Business) - As one of his first acts as president, Joe Biden called on several federal departments and agencies to extend their bans on evictions and foreclosures for those affected by the coronavirus until at least the end of March.  One of several executive actions Biden took on Wednesday, it is a signal from the incoming administration that immediate action is needed in order to stabilize housing for the estimated 25 million renters and homeowners who are at risk of losing their homes. The action seeks to extend the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's federal moratorium on eviction for non-payment of rent by two more months. The CDC's order first went into effect in September and the latest stimulus bill extended the protection until January 31. President Biden also asked the Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of Agriculture, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development to extend foreclosure moratoriums for federally backed mortgages until March 31. He asked these agencies to accept applications for forbearance for federally guaranteed mortgages until that time as well. In response, the USDA announced it would extend its deadlines to the end of March. On Tuesday, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) ​extended​ its foreclosure and eviction moratoriums until the end of February. But the President asked for that period to be extended. Biden also asked the enterprises to continue accepting forbearance applications for all loans guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  An estimated 14 million adults living in rental housing were behind on their rent in December, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. That is 1 in 5 renters. An estimated 11.8 million adults are behind on their mortgage.  These shortfalls disproportionately impact families of color. While 12% of White renters said they had not been able to catch up on their rent, 24% of Latino and 28% of Black renters said they had fallen behind.  While Biden's executive action provides some immediate protections, administration officials say the bans on evictions and foreclosures are not enough.  That is why the President is also asking Congress to approve a Covid relief bill that would provide $35 billion in rent, utilities and homelessness relief. That would be in addition to the $25 billion in rent relief included in the second stimulus passed in December.  The rent relief is critical because an eviction ban does not cancel rent. It will cost $76.1 billion over twelve months just to assist extremely and very low-income households composed of renters hurt by this pandemic, according to an estimate from the National Low Income Housing Coalition. Meanwhile, small landlords are being squeezed. Struggling renters had been protected by a patchwork of federal, state and local eviction moratoriums, many of which expired over the summer. The first large stimulus package offered a narrow eviction protection for renters whose landlords had a federally backed mortgage and for those living in federally assisted housing.  In September, the Centers for Disease Control put in place an eviction moratorium that protected all eligible renters from being evicted for non payment of rent. The emergency order temporarily prohibits new and previously filed evictions from occurring in an effort to prevent further transmission of the coronavirus. But it is up to the tenant to invoke the protection. And despite the ban, evictions are still taking place. A federally mandated eviction moratorium comes as much-needed relief to those on the front lines of assisting struggling renters. "If all we get is an extension of the CDC order, we'll take it," said Dana Karni, managing attorney at Lone Star Legal Aid's Eviction Right to Counsel Project in Texas. But she added that many tenants are still being evicted. In Harris County, Texas, she said it is the minority of tenants in litigation who have used the CDC protection. The CDC order does not protect against a landlord not renewing a lease when it expires.  "In other words, things look awfully bleak in Houston," Karni said. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

52 Couples struggle with sleep problems in the Covid-19 pandemic
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_c38fc083c6411ecca4ace207e1ad3808
(CNN) - Dave Russell is a light sleeper, but he never had any issues sharing a bed with his girlfriend, Izzy James, before the pandemic.  Things began to change in March. Lockdown significantly altered Russell's daily life. Like many people, he started working from home and limiting his contact with others, and he began to struggle to sleep through the night.  Before the coronavirus, Russell and James would spend most of their working days apart in separate offices outside their home. For the last nine months, the two have both been working from their studio apartment in London. "We were literally sitting opposite each other for the whole day, and then when the workday was finished, we would just move to the sofa," he told CNN. "It felt like we were in the same room all of the time." Because they were. Couples are having to spend more time together under enormously stressful circumstances during the coronavirus pandemic, and it's affecting their ability to get enough sleep. Sharing a bed can cause sleep problems Sharing a bed and sleep-related problems can be connected, experts say. Sleep specialists say they are currently treating quarantined couples struggling to sleep in the same bed, and it's creating and compounding problems in their relationships. "Sleep amongst couples is completely interdependent," said Wendy Troxel, a senior behavioral and social scientist at the nonprofit RAND Corporation in Santa Monica, California. "When you share a bed with another human being, your sleep is affected and it affects the other person who shares the bed with you." Research has backed this up. If a person's sleep is disrupted by their partner during the night, it can lead to an argument in the relationship the following day, according to a 2013 study from the University of California, Berkeley. New York-based clinical psychologist Orna Guralnik, host of the Showtime series "Couples Therapy," agreed. "There are petty little grudges that accumulate," she said.  "There is a hyper-focus on the other person, and not enough distance between people to feel their independent existence. You put that in the context of sleeping together all night -- it becomes too much, too symbiotic for people." Many people have a heightened sense of awareness when they share a bed with their partner, especially if it is somebody who they are currently in conflict with, behavioral sleep medicine specialist Britney Blair said. Arguments during the day can cause anxiety that can disrupt a healthy sleep cycle, said Blair, who works at the Stanford Center for Sleep Sciences and Medicine in Palo Alto, California. Sleep is the most vulnerable state for the human body, she said -- and the part of the brain that regulates our sleep, the hypothalamus, is sensitive to any external tension. "If that primitive part of the brain perceives anything as wrong, it's not going to allow sleep to happen. It does not know the difference between a saber-toothed tiger who has just entered the cave and you need to be vigilant, or if you had an argument with your partner and you need to be vigilant." Too much togetherness is toxic for some people  Some lockdowns have led to breakups, which Sara, who didn't want to share her last name for privacy reasons, experienced firsthand. Constant arguments with her now ex-boyfriend left her on edge and sleep deprived. While initially welcoming the thought of how convenient working remotely might be as the pandemic began, she soon realized that things at home were becoming quite claustrophobic. "Right before the pandemic, I was working crazy hours, I was always exhausted, and it was super stressful because I was also going to school," she told CNN. "I thought, working from home or taking a break might actually be helpful, but being stuck with him in an apartment made me realize that no matter how stressful the job was, I absolutely needed that. I was using it as an escape from the relationship." Meanwhile, Russell's solution was to move. After six months of living in a tightly enclosed studio, he and his partner have recently moved to a larger space. It has allowed him to go to bed in a separate room. The new arrangement has improved his sleep but -- as he admitted -- it's not the ideal situation for intimacy in the relationship. It can lead to a breakup Sara employed the same tactics in the early days of her lockdown by shifting from a shared bed with her then-boyfriend to the couch, a move that improved her sleep. Yet a few months ago, the two moved from New York to California and into a smaller studio, leaving her with no ability to "sleep on the couch or sleep anywhere else." What's worse? They've broken up in recent weeks but still live together because her ex is unemployed right now, and she doesn't want to put him through more hardship in such a challenging economic environment. She has had an even harder time sleeping while he is still around. Facing lockdown with children Being in the same space continually can be even harder with children at home. With many schools closed for the foreseeable future, the added pressure of being a working parent can lead to a real struggle to get any rest at night. Troxel at the RAND Corporation has seen an increase in this pattern among sleep deprived patients at her clinic. "If you're constantly battling with your spouse because you're sharing a very tight space and trying to balance your work with your children, it can tilt the scale towards being more vigilant rather than feeling safe and having your spouse help you wind down at night," she said. For some couples, the situation has gotten so desperate that they are even attempting a sleep divorce, of sorts, in an effort to catch an hour or two of rest.  Guralnik is treating couples "using all sorts of pretty intensive devices to create some semblance of a boundary. So anything from going to sleep at separate times, earplugs, one person falling asleep on the couch, all of these ways to mimic boundaries where they do not exist anymore." Lack of a regular schedule can hurt It's not just the lack of physical boundaries during the day that is hurting a couple's sleep cycles. Without the regimented schedule of a commute to and from the office, or dropping the kids off at school, people are embracing their more natural circadian rhythms. Those who prefer to stay up late or get up early can now fully embrace their inner morning lark or night owl, which can lead to sleep issues if a couple isn't in sync.  "One partner may be more of a night owl naturally and that's only exacerbated when they don't have to wake up in the morning to get off to work. The other partner might naturally be more of a morning person. She stays up watching Netflix, he goes to bed and then she gets into bed later and might disrupt his sleep," Troxel said. That's not surprising, according to a 2016 study published in the Journal of Biological and Medical Rhythm Research, which found that couples who don't complement each other's sleeping patterns have more relationship conflict, lesser sexual activity and poorer relationship satisfaction. In Sara's case, the pandemic has exposed some preexisting issues, which helped to accelerate a breakup that may have been coming anyway. But for others, some relationships might come out of their current predicament in a better place and resolve their problems.  With the safest option being to stay at home these days, Blair told CNN that there will be some who are able to pass the Covid-19 stress test and "learn to work through their sleep issues because they don't have a choice and might actually come out closer." Ever the optimist, Russell remains confident that "there will come a point where things are the way they used to be" when it comes to sleeping with his girlfriend, once we reach the end of the current health crisis.  © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

53 Biden rescinding the 1776 Commission doesn't end the fight over history
http://lite.cnn.com/en/article/h_489d4700dec9403089198746309c04a7
Editor's Note: Nicole Hemmer is an associate research scholar at Columbia University with the Obama Presidency Oral History Project and the author of "Messengers of the Right: Conservative Media and the Transformation of American Politics." She co-hosts the history podcast "Past Present" and "This Day in Esoteric Political History." The views expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author. View more opinion articles on CNN. (CNN) - On his first day in office, President Joe Biden signed a stack of executive orders, doing everything from rescinding the Muslim travel ban to reversing the US departure from the World Health Organization to asking federal agencies to extend their moratoriums on foreclosure and eviction during the pandemic. But he also revoked one of the Trump administration's final projects: the 1776 Commission.  The commission, an advisory committee of academics and conservative activists convened by then-President Donald Trump, issued a 41-page report on Monday, seeking to counter the 1619 Project, a New York Times initiative that explored the central role of slavery and anti-Black racism in US history. Denouncing works that "tell America's story solely as one of oppression and victimhood," the 1776 Commission's report insists that real history is history that focuses on the country's successes, with only an occasional nod to its failures.  The people behind the report had been directed by Trump to develop a program for "patriotic education." And while the report has little to do with academic history -- it has no footnotes or sources, and large chunks appear to be cribbed from op-eds and other polemics -- it exemplifies the worst misuses of history during the Trump era: as myth and propaganda.   The report itself does not amount to much. It is the detritus of the waning days of the Trump administration, a bit of unfinished business sent out the door in the closing hours and now swept away by an incoming administration. But as a study in the growth of right-wing pseudohistory, it's a key document. As pseudohistory, it argues from ideology rather than evidence, starting with an argument -- that all bad things come from the left -- and then pretzeling the past to fit a politically expedient thesis, one that deliberately erases the need to grapple with things like racism or contradiction. Under the Trump administration, proponents of this ideology reached a new peak of influence, and Trump's defeat does not relegate them to the fringe.  Reading history through the 1776 Commission's ideological lens produces some pretty strange conclusions. In the report, anti-racists and anti-fascists are the successors of enslavers and Nazis. John C. Calhoun, an ardent defender of slavery who argued that it was not "a necessary evil" but "a positive good," becomes, in the commission's telling, the father of identity politics. An appendix draws a straight line from Calhoun to today's civil rights activists -- the very ones who have committed themselves to dismantling White supremacy.   That bizarre argument is not original to the 1776 Commission. Over the past few decades, a cottage industry of right-wing histories has thrived in the United States, making up in sales what they lack in credibility. But they do more than fatten their authors' wallets: they are part of the alternative reality constructed by conservative media. (Not coincidentally, many of the authors of these books are right-wing media figures, from Brian Kilmeade and Glenn Beck to Dinesh D'Souza and Bill O'Reilly.)  The master of the genre is D'Souza, and it's worth noting that the vice chair of the commission is a favorite of his, political scientist Carol Swain, who features heavily in his documentaries. Over the past decade, D'Souza has pumped out a steady stream of books and documentaries aimed at rewriting history so that every dark action can be traced to the Democratic Party and the modern left. The histories themselves are fatuous, as I've explored in-depth elsewhere, relying on the basic claim that the Democratic Party was pro-slavery in the 19th century so must necessarily be racist today.  That tissue-thin argument does not stand up to any rigorous scrutiny. But it's not meant to. The point of these pseudohistories is not to construct a careful argument about the past -- or to educate anyone looking to know more -- but rather a set of talking points that can be used to shut down any meaningful conversation about racism.  The 1776 Commission is written from that same defensive crouch. Rather than engage in a conversation about the way racism has shaped the history and institutions of the United States, they have written a field guide for dismissing such discussions as efforts to "demean America's heritage, dishonor our heroes, or deny our principles."   The commission's stated aim of "patriotic education" was part of a broader right-wing effort to refocus attention on how schools teach American history. The entire enterprise was motivated in part by the decision by the 1619 Project's creators to release a guide for using their project in classrooms. Many right-wing politicians recoiled at the inclusion of new scholarship on the persistent influence of slavery and discrimination in the United States. In September 2020, the same month he announced the 1776 commission, Trump tweeted that schools using the 1619 Project "will not be funded!" and Sen. Tom Cotton proposed legislation that would ban its use in schools. The education fight gave detractors' grievances against the 1619 Project urgency and heft: they knew that if it became part of children's education, it could have an even greater impact on how Americans view their past.   Despite the carelessness with which many of these far-right conservatives treat history, they understand how important, and how powerful, our historical narratives are. The stories we tell about our past inform our understanding of the present and our vision for the future. That's why the battles over history are so fierce. The early 1990s saw a debate over public history and school curriculums so pitched it became known as "the history wars." Just a few years ago, conservatives attempted to rewrite Advanced Placement standards to give US history a rosier glow.     In more recent years, Black activists have challenged the whitewashed history of the Confederacy represented by unapologetic displays of the Confederate flag and the monuments to Confederate leaders, sparking increasingly visible -- and in the case of Unite the Right in Charlottesville, deadly — clashes in the shadows of  those monuments. Even Trump's slogan, "Make America Great Again," was rooted in an argument over history: that there was an Edenic national past that had been lost, and that former President Trump vowed to restore.   These fights over our past are critically important, but as the 1776 report shows, they are not always fought in good faith. President Biden dedicated part of his inaugural address to a defense of truth. "There is truth and there are lies, lies told for power and for profit," he said. "And each of us has a duty and responsibility, as citizens, as Americans, and especially as leaders, leaders who have pledged to honor our Constitution and protect our nation, to defend the truth and defeat the lies." In dissolving the 1776 Commission on his first day in office, President Biden helped end one source of misinformation about our past, a reminder that, as we work to restore democracy, we will need to restore honest inquiry and accurate history as well. © 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Listen to CNN (low-bandwidth usage) Go to the full CNN experience

