CSM Articles
1 - Poisoned Kremlin critic Navalny arrested upon return to Russia
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/Europe/2021/0117/Poisoned-Kremlin-critic-Navalny-arrested-upon-return-to-Russia
Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny was arrested Sunday at a Moscow airport as he tried to enter the country from Germany, where he had spent five months recovering from nerve agent poisoning that he blames on the Kremlin.Mr. Navalny’s detention at passport control in Moscow’s Sheremetyevo airport was widely expected because Russia’s prisons service said he had violated parole terms from a suspended sentence on a 2014 embezzlement conviction.The prisons service said he would be held in custody until a court rules on his case. No date for a court appearance was immediately announced. The service earlier said that it would seek to have Mr. Navalny serve his 3 1/2-year sentence behind bars.Mr. Navalny, 44, who is President Vladimir Putin’s most prominent and determined foe, brushed off concerns about arrest as he boarded the plane in Berlin.“It’s impossible. I’m an innocent man,” he said.The arrest raises tensions in Russia as it approaches national parliament elections this year, in which Mr. Navalny’s organization is expected to be active in trying to defeat pro-Kremlin candidates. Mr. Navalny decided to leave Berlin of his own free will and wasn’t under any apparent pressure to leave from Germany.“This is a real act of bravery for Alexei Navalny to return to Russia, given that government agents already tried to kill him once,” Human Rights Watch Executive Director Kenneth Roth tweeted. “But he understandably wants to be part of the pro-democracy movement in Russia, not a dissident in exile.”Mr. Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, responded to a question about the arrest by saying “Was he arrested in Germany? I’m not up to date,” according to the online news site Podyom. Mr. Peskov, like Mr. Putin, is noted for avoiding saying Navalny’s name.Mr. Navalny has sizable popularity in Moscow. Many supporters on Sunday went to Vnukovo airport where his flight was scheduled to land, though it was diverted to Sheremetyevo without explanation.The OVD-Info organization that monitors political arrests said at least 53 people were arrested, including Navalny supporters and journalists, at Vnukovo, where where the arrivals hall had been blocked off and prisoner transport vehicles were parked outside. There were at least three detentions at Sheremetyevo, it said.The independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta and opposition social media reported Sunday that several Navalny supporters in St. Petersburg had been removed from Moscow-bound trains or been prevented from boarding flights late Saturday and early Sunday, including the coordinator of his staff for the region of Russia’s second-largest city.Mr. Navalny fell into a coma while aboard a domestic flight from Siberia to Moscow on Aug. 20. He was transferred from a hospital in Siberia to a Berlin hospital two days later.Labs in Germany, France and Sweden, and tests by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, established that he was exposed to a Soviet-era Novichok nerve agent.Russian authorities insisted that the doctors who treated Mr. Navalny in Siberia before he was airlifted to Germany found no traces of poison and have challenged German officials to provide proof of his poisoning. Russia refused to open a full-fledged criminal inquiry, citing a lack of evidence that Mr. Navalny was poisoned.Last month, Mr. Navalny released the recording of a phone call he said he made to a man he described as an alleged member of a group of officers of the Federal Security Service, or FSB, who purportedly poisoned him in August and then tried to cover it up. The FSB dismissed the recording as fake.Mr. Navalny has been a thorn in the Kremlin’s side for a decade, unusually durable in an opposition movement often demoralized by repressions.He has been jailed repeatedly in connection with protests and twice was convicted of financial misdeeds in cases that he said were politically motivated. He suffered significant eye damage when an assailant threw disinfectant into his face and was taken from jail to a hospital in 2019 with an illness that authorities said was an allergic reaction but that many suspected was poisoning.A lawyer by training, he began his rise to prominence by focusing on corruption in Russia’s murky mix of politics and business. In 2008, he bought shares in Russian oil and gas companies, so he could push for transparency as an activist shareholder.Mr. Navalny’s work to expose corrupt elites had a pocketbook appeal to the Russian people’s widespread sense of being cheated. Russia’s state-controlled television channels ignored Mr. Navalny, but his investigations of dubious contracts and officials’ luxurious lifestyles got wide attention through the back channels of YouTube videos and social media posts that often showed his sardonic sense of humor.In 2013, he placed second in the race for Moscow mayor behind the candidate of Mr. Putin’s power-base United Russia party. That established him as a formidable force and a worry to the Kremlin.He intended to run for president in 2018, but was kept off the ballot because of his previous criminal convictions. His own legal obstacles and the widespread obstruction authorities set before other independent candidates seeking public office led Mr. Navalny and his organization to adopt a new strategy for the 2019 Moscow city council elections.The “Smart Vote” initiative analyzed which candidate in each district appeared to have the best chance of beating United Russia’s pick and tried to drum up support for that candidate.The initiative appeared to be a success, with nearly half of the city council seats going to “systemic opposition” candidates, although its effectiveness couldn’t be quantified. Mr. Navalny intends to redeploy the same strategy in this year’s national parliament elections.This story was reported by the Associated Press. Geir Moulson in Berlin contributed to this report.

2 - Uganda's president claims sixth win amid allegations of rigging
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/Africa/2021/0116/Uganda-s-president-claims-sixth-win-amid-allegations-of-rigging
Uganda’s electoral commission said Saturday that longtime President Yoweri Museveni has won a sixth five-year term, while top opposition challenger Bobi Wine alleges rigging and officials struggle to explain how polling results were compiled amid an internet blackout.In a generational clash watched across the African continent with a booming young population and a host of aging leaders, the 38-year-old singer-turned-lawmaker Mr. Wine posed arguably Mr. Museveni’s greatest challenge yet. The self-described “ghetto president” had strong support in urban centers where frustration with unemployment and corruption is high. He has claimed victory.The electoral commission said Mr. Museveni received 58% of ballots and Mr. Wine 34%, and voter turnout was 52%. It advised people celebrating to remember COVID-19 precautions, but reaction in the capital, Kampala, was muted. At one point, hundreds of Museveni supporters on motorcycles sped by, honking and chanting. The military remained in the streets. Police checked vehicles at roadblocks.The top United States diplomat to Africa called the electoral process “fundamentally flawed.”Associated Press journalists who tried to reach Mr. Wine’s home on the outskirts of Kampala were turned away by police. Mr. Wine has said he was alone with his wife and a single security guard.Thursday’s vote followed the East African country’s worst pre-election violence since the 76-year-old Mr. Museveni took office in 1986. Mr. Wine and other opposition candidates were beaten or harassed, and more than 50 people were killed when security forces put down riots in November over Mr. Wine’s arrest.This month, Mr. Wine petitioned the International Criminal Court over alleged torture and other abuses by security forces and named several officials including Mr. Museveni.Mr. Wine on Friday said he has video evidence of vote-rigging and “every legal option is on the table” to challenge the official election results, including peaceful protests. Candidates can challenge election results at the Supreme Court.Hours later, he tweeted that the military had entered his home compound and “we are in serious trouble,” which the military denied. Mr. Wine, whose real name is Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, was arrested several times while campaigning but never convicted, and eventually he wore a flak jacket and said he feared for his life. Many on his campaign team are in detention.Uganda’s electoral commission has said Mr. Wine should prove his allegations of rigging, and it has deflected questions about how countrywide voting results were transmitted during the internet blackout by saying “we designed our own system.”“We did not receive any orders from above during this election,” commission chief Simon Byabakama told reporters Saturday, adding his team was “neither intimidated nor threatened.”While Uganda’s president holds on to power, at least nine of his Cabinet ministers, including the vice president, were voted out in parliamentary elections, many losing to candidates from Mr. Wine’s party, local media reported.Monitoring of the vote was further complicated by the arrests of independent monitors and the denial of accreditation to most members of the U.S. observer mission, leading the U.S. to call it off. The European Union said its offer to deploy electoral experts “was not taken up.”“Uganda’s electoral process has been fundamentally flawed,” the top U.S. diplomat for Africa, Tibor Nagy, tweeted, calling for the immediate and full restoration of internet access and warning that “the U.S. response hinges on what the Ugandan government does now.”Mr. Museveni, once praised as part of a new generation of African leaders and a longtime U.S. security ally, still has support among some in Uganda for bringing stability. He once criticized African leaders who refused to step aside but has since overseen the removal of term limits and an age limit on the presidency.He alleged repeatedly that foreign groups are trying to meddle in this election, without providing evidence. He also accused Mr. Wine of being “an agent of foreign interests.” Mr. Wine denies it.The head of the African Union observer team, Samuel Azuu Fonkam, told reporters he could not say whether the election was free and fair, noting the “limited” mission which largely focused on Kampala. Asked about Mr. Wine’s allegations of rigging, he said he could not “speak about things we did not see or observe.”The East African Community observer team noted “disproportionate use of force in some instances” by security forces, the internet shutdown, some late-opening polling stations and isolated cases of failure in biometric kits to verify voters. But it called the vote largely peaceful and said it “demonstrated the level of maturity expected of a democracy.”Uganda’s elections are often marred by allegations of fraud and abuses by security forces. The previous election saw sporadic post-election riots.This story was reported by the Associated Press.

3 - Points of Progress: FIFA guarantees maternity leave, and more
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/Progress-Watch/2021/0115/Points-of-Progress-FIFA-guarantees-maternity-leave-and-more
1. United StatesSeveral U.S. cities are addressing voting rights violations for non-English speakers with new urgency, including Malden, Massachusetts, where people of Asian descent make up 23% of its residents. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 calls for translated voting materials in jurisdictions that meet certain criteria, such as having 10,000 eligible voters or 5% of the resident population who speak limited English, but many communities still struggle to accommodate multilingual populations. Malden, which has been covered by Section 203 of the Voting Rights Act since 2016, has made significant strides in eliminating language barriers to voting. During the 2020 elections, city officials partnered with community organizations to host in-person and online information sessions, focusing efforts on senior centers. They professionally translated voting materials, rather than relying on Google software; recruited bilingual poll workers; and hired a full-time election worker fluent in English, Mandarin, and Cantonese. The government has also vowed to transliterate candidates’ names in 2021 – a strategy not required by law but used in nearby Boston to make ballots less confusing for Chinese speakers. Advocates hope Malden will serve as a role model for other communities. (The Guardian)2. PeruAlphabet’s Loon project is using cutting-edge artificial intelligence to keep its high-altitude balloons afloat, improving the aerial wireless networks that offer internet to isolated communities in Peru and other countries. Loon’s goal is to expand internet access by sending balloons to remote areas and disaster zones where ground internet is unavailable. Keeping those floating cellphone towers in the stratosphere is a complex – and potentially costly – process, but reinforcement learning can allow the flight systems to navigate without human intervention. Researchers explain how the Loon team dispatched a balloon to Peru, where it joined a cluster of balloons serving a community that lost connectivity in a 2019 earthquake, before moving south and spending the next seven months circumnavigating the globe. By the time it landed in Mexico, the balloon had been airborne for a record-breaking 312 days. “In essence, we have built a machine that is capable of building a better navigation system than we humans can,” said Sal Candido, Loon’s chief technology officer. (Digital Trends, Nature)3. FranceFrance has become the first country to roll out new repairability labels for consumer electronics, part of a widespread effort to reduce electronic waste. Consumers generate millions of tons of e-waste around the world annually, as they replace outdated or failing technology. But a recent survey found that 77% of European Union residents prefer to repair their devices rather than buy new ones. The European Parliament has since approved a landmark “right to repair” resolution, promising consumers clear information on the life span and repairability of products from smartphones to lawn mowers, and France is reportedly the first to introduce the tags. France’s new labeling system considers several product characteristics, including ease of disassembly and cost of parts, to rate the item on a repairability scale of 1 to 10. The labels are designed to help consumers shop with confidence, and other countries are expected to follow suit. (FR24 News, TIME)4. SyriaSyrian women are working to lift the shame around reporting instances of “sextortion,” an illegal form of online harassment. Sextortion involves first convincing a person to share nude photographs or videos as a form of romantic seduction and then threatening to expose those images if sexual favors or money are not provided. In Syria, premarital sex is considered an immense cultural taboo, which often leads to sextortion victims suffering in silence. In 2019, Syrian doctor Zainab AlAassi launched the “It Is Your Right” campaign to encourage victims to ask for help by offering free legal consultations and emotional support. So far, the campaign says 1,100 women have come forward, and in most cases, the harassment ends when they file a formal lawsuit. Other groups are trying to intervene earlier. Started by four friends who faced online harassment themselves, the “No to Electronic Sexual Harassment” group has gained more than 2,000 members since it launched in September, including men and women. Members have worked together to shut down dozens of Facebook accounts that were harassing women. (DW)5. ChinaChina passed new laws strengthening protections of the Chang, or Yangtze, Asia’s longest river. Years of pollution have devastated the river, depleting fish populations and straining riverbank communities. Starting March 1, fishing on the river’s major tributaries, lakes, and other natural waterways will be banned.Polluting industries face reforms or relocation, and no chemical projects can be built or expanded within a kilometer of the Chang. Anyone who uses the river to transport toxic material could receive fines up to $765,000. The legislation – the country’s first to defend a specific river basin’s resources – includes 96 provisions, aimed at integrating the economic development of cities along the 3,900-mile waterway with ecological protections. (Reuters, Sixth Tone)WorldThe highest governing soccer organization is introducing a new policy to safeguard the rights of female players, namely mandatory maternity leave. In December, the FIFA Council approved a measure that guarantees female players 14 weeks maternity leave, provides “adequate medical and physical support,” and secures their place on the team post-leave. Many players in Europe are already protected under their specific country’s labor laws, but FIFA hopes to establish “new global minimum standards” for clubs around the world. Under the new rules, clubs are obligated to reintegrate female players when they return.“If we are serious about boosting the women’s game, we have to look at all these aspects,” FIFA President Gianni Infantino told reporters. “Female players need to have stability in their careers and if they take maternity leave, they should not have to worry about when they are ready to play again.” (Reuters)

4 - Europe criticizes Trump Twitter ban – but not for reason you'd expect
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/Europe/2021/0115/Europe-criticizes-Trump-Twitter-ban-but-not-for-reason-you-d-expect
When Twitter banned Donald Trump, the chattering class in Europe began twittering.The American president was stripped of his digital megaphone? Based on what criteria? And, ultimately, who should be able to decide?German Chancellor Angela Merkel was clear: She found Twitter’s decision “problematic” – not because of the ban, but because of who imposed it. Rather than private companies having final say on the “fundamental right” to expression, it should be “the law and within the framework defined by legislators,” said her spokesman.Tyson Barker, head of technology policy at the German Council on Foreign Relations, checked the Twitter account of Germany’s most prominent far-right nationalist. Still active. “The platforms’ approach is being applied selectively,” he says, “and at their heart these are political decisions.” Better, he argues, would be an agile, trust-based regulatory ecosystem that includes government, civil society, and users checking each other.In 2017, the German government embarked on a first step toward a regulatory system by passing a law compelling social media platforms to identify and remove “illegal” content. A few years into the most ambitious attempt to police online content that a Western democracy has yet made, it’s unclear whether the move has civilized online discourse, or simply pushed dark speech off moderated platforms and into closed groups such as Telegram.Yet with Mr. Trump’s social media bans animating debate, the German law being continually revised, and a Europe-wide version currently before the European Parliament, a long-overdue global conversation is finally underway.“We’re playing catch-up to 15 years of internet development,” says Lisa Dittmer, internet freedom advocacy officer for Reporters Without Borders. “It’s ridiculous it’s taken this long. This issue has been pushed to the forefront in a huge way now. The positive side is we’re starting this debate of how to democratize internet spaces.”How they do it in GermanyUnder Germany’s Network Enforcement Act, large social media platforms such as Twitter and Facebook must allow users to flag content. Once content is flagged, the onus is on the platforms to review and remove within 24 hours what they deem “illegal” under Germany’s criminal code.In other words, German lawmakers set the legal framework, and social media platforms must operate within it.“Germany basically says government should regulate speech, not private companies,” says Ian Rosenberg, an American media lawyer and author of “The Fight for Free Speech: Ten Cases That Define Our First Amendment Freedoms.” “That is absolutely opposite to the American constitutional tradition, which is that the government should be prohibited from regulating private speech. They are totally antithetical to each other.”It’s worth noting that Germans are traditionally more comfortable than Americans with state interference in speech, given the country’s dark history of Nazi-related hate speech.Sedition, public incitement, terrorism, and symbols of unconstitutional organizations are targeted as “illegal” content by the German law. Platforms have engaged hundreds of new moderators to review flagged content, and must publish transparency reports every six months.The major platforms are largely complying. During the first half of 2020, Twitter removed or blocked 120,000 tweets. Facebook’s compliance has been less transparent; in 2019 it was fined for incomplete reporting. That year it deleted or blocked only 349 pieces of content.Facebook’s flag mechanism wasn’t “user-friendly,” says Amélie Heldt, a Berlin-based researcher on platform governance. “Users simply could not see or understand” how to make a complaint.But it doesn’t always workWhile platforms are largely seen as attempting to comply, say analysts, the climate of online conversation does not appear to have become more civil. The law also has clear problems.Twenty-four hours is hardly enough time to act prudently and there’s practically no downside to removing more content than needed in order to avoid fines. That creates “an incentive for overblocking, for removing content that when further assessed, is in fact legal,” says Jana Gooth, a European Parliament legal policy advisor.Secondly, it compels platforms to do the job of German law enforcement in deciding what’s “illegal,” a particularly grave responsibility since the government does not systematically evaluate those decisions, says Stephan Mundges, a digital communications researcher at TU Dortmund University.At the same time, the law does not allow users to appeal, a failing that the Europe-wide Digital Services Act, soon to be debated in the EU parliament, will attempt to address.Further, many of the conspiracy theories being shared, such as climate change denial or false claims about coronavirus, do not constitute illegal speech under German law. German nationalist Attila Hildmann, for example, still has an active Twitter account, despite having organized protests against coronavirus restrictions, ranted against Ms. Merkel’s legitimacy, and spoken at an August 2020 rally from which people attempted to breach the Reichstag, the German parliament.In fact, the vast majority of removed posts are taken down not to comply with German law, but with Twitter and Facebook’s own community standards, which do not depend on user complaints.Some critics fear the German law could set a bad precedent for authoritarian governments. A Danish think tank reported in 2019 that at least 10 countries with varying levels of civil rights protections have directly or indirectly referred to the German law as justification for their own online censorship rules, including Russia, Vietnam, and Kenya.Meanwhile, dark speech is clearly moving into unmoderated messaging spaces such as Signal and Telegram. German nationalist Mr. Hildmann, for example, often uses Twitter to direct his followers to Telegram, where groups of up to 200,000 members are allowed and content is not moderated.The debate over who should have the responsibility to regulate online content, and how they should exercise it, has a complicated path ahead of it, say internet experts.“It’s not clear cut,” says Mr. Rosenberg, the media lawyer. “It’s not like the European model has eliminated hateful discrimination or violence against minorities. It can be a good thing [that Americans] don’t allow government to regulate speech. Both systems have something to learn from each other.”Ultimately, societies must address the roots underlying extremism, says Ms. Dittmer of Reporters Without Borders. “This is also a societal problem, not just a digital policy issue,” she points out. “You also need to ask questions: why we have extremism, and how we can reach people before they fall into these networks.”

5 - Israel is a vaccination leader, but it labors to reach Arab citizens
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/Middle-East/2021/0115/Israel-is-a-vaccination-leader-but-it-labors-to-reach-Arab-citizens
The narrow roads of Daliyat el-Karmel, outside Haifa, were jammed on a recent afternoon.Hundreds of Jewish Israelis had poured into the hilltop Druze town after hearing there were 900 extra doses of the COVID-19 vaccine available at a vaccination center. The perishable doses had to be used that evening, or be thrown out.Some Druze who arrived to be vaccinated were ushered to the front of what became a long line snaking down the main street. But they were far outnumbered by their Jewish counterparts, a vivid illustration of a public health challenge facing the country.Israel has been making international headlines as a vaccine rollout machine as it seeks to become the first country to reach communitywide immunity. But to reach that milestone, a major hurdle has to be cleared: increasing vaccination levels among its Arab minority, 20% of the population.Indeed, while over 75% of Jewish citizens over the age of 60 have already been vaccinated, the figure among Arabs is just 43%.Changing those numbers is less a logistical challenge than it is one of persuasion.Some Israeli Arabs are avoiding vaccination centers because of rumors on social media fueling mistrust of the vaccine’s safety and efficacy. Others are deterred by conspiracy theories about the Israeli authorities, in whom trust is already shaky due to years of systemic discrimination.Still others deny that COVID-19 is even a problem.The phenomenon appears somewhat surprising, given that a growing number of Israeli Arabs work in health care, representing nearly a fifth of the country’s doctors, 24% of its nurses, and 48% of all pharmacists, government data show.Reduced access to health clinics, especially for Bedouin Arabs in southern Israel, many of whom are scattered in tiny shantytowns that lack basic services, also contributes to the lower numbers.Among the Bedouin, who have to travel to nearby towns and cities to get vaccinated, the vaccination rate for those over 60 is close to 20%.Drafting Arab doctorsNow, however, three weeks into the vaccination push, the numbers of Israeli Arabs getting vaccinated have begun to rise, as a public awareness campaign tapping religious leaders and other “influencers” from the Arab community – from professional soccer players to lawmakers and doctors – gains momentum.Their message, in photographs of themselves getting vaccinated, is this: Arab citizens have nothing to fear. Get your vaccine, just as we have.Bishar Bisharat, a family doctor and public health specialist who chairs the Society for Arab Health within the Israeli Medical Association, says seeing Arab physicians getting vaccinated is especially important.“Patients know their family doctors in Arab villages and towns. They know where they live, and how they behave,” he says. “They see them as role models.”Not enough of the doctors, however, are speaking up, says Dr. Bisharat. He and other public health officials note that there is wariness about the vaccine even among the physicians, most of whom are not experts in the field and can fall prey to some of the same rumors circulating among their friends and family.To help remedy that and increase the ranks of advocates, he’s preparing a nationwide forum to educate and mobilize Arab doctors.As in other parts of the world, higher rates of poverty and lower levels of education can lead to what public health officials term low “health literacy.”Among Israel’s Arab minority, that phenomenon combines with a contentious history with the Jewish majority to create a public mindset more receptive to conspiracy theories.Rumors raging online range from an international favorite – that the vaccine is a ruse by Microsoft founder Bill Gates to implant trackable microchips – to suspicions that the vaccine will make people infertile.Nadav Davidovitch, director of Ben-Gurion University’s School of Public Health, notes that Israel’s Arab citizens are among the most highly vaccinated groups in the country for other vaccines, so the pushback is not borne of anti-vaccination tendencies.“It’s more specifically about COVID-19, and rumors around it being developed so fast and the consequences for fertility. So those are the main issues that need to be addressed,” says Dr. Davidovitch, who is on Israel’s national advisory committee for COVID-19.Vaccinating PalestiniansEven as Israel wrestles with how to persuade its Arab citizens to get vaccinated, it faces calls to ensure that Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza are covered as well.Israel maintains that the health of the Palestinian population is the responsibility of the Palestinian Authority. Critics of this policy, including Israeli human rights groups, counter that Israel has a moral obligation to vaccinate Palestinians, arguing that ultimately they still live under its control.There has been no official Palestinian request to Israel. Officials say they are expecting their first vaccine shipments to arrive by the end of February.On Thursday Israel announced it would vaccinate Palestinian inmates in Israeli prisons.Palestinians living in East Jerusalem, meanwhile, have health insurance through Israel’s socialized health system, and have access to its vaccination program. But suspicion of Israeli authorities runs high, and conspiracy theories are rampant.Dr. Dima Bitar, who runs an East Jerusalem clinic of Clalit, Israel’s largest HMO, says every day brings new “fake news,” as she puts it.“Are you sure we are taking the same vaccines as the Jews? Is it coming from the same vials?” people ask her. They fear that Jewish Israelis are getting the real vaccine, but that they might be getting one that at best is experimental, or at worst is intentionally lethal.“And that’s just what I heard today,” she says, sounding frazzled as she sits in her office, interrupted every few moments with queries from patients and staff.“The fact that we have Jews coming to the clinic for vaccinations has actually helped Arabs get vaccinated too,” she says, saying it boosts confidence in the vaccine among local residents.One doctor’s campaign When Dr. Riad Majadla, head of the coronavirus ward at Sharon Hospital in central Israel, gets home to his town of Baka al-Gharbiya every night at 8, he starts a second shift of sorts. He answers the 250 to 300 messages and texts he’s received over the day from Arab citizens across the country asking about the virus, and more recently about the vaccine.He reads out loud a couple that have just come through: “I’m 72. I have heart disease and diabetes. Can I vaccinate?” Another asks: “I’m four months pregnant, should I vaccinate?” His answer to both of them, he says, will be “yes.”Dr. Majadla is one of five physicians in his family – all of whom have been on the front lines of fighting the virus. When he saw that only a trickle of those Arabs eligible for the first round were being vaccinated, he decided to do something.Following on a public health education campaign he waged at the beginning of the crisis, in which he encouraged preventive behavior, he went back to speaking out on the radio and posting live videos on Facebook explaining why and how the vaccine is safe and works.Dr. Majadla is now seeing more acceptance of the vaccine on his Facebook page, mixed in with a minority of voices who deride him as a “collaborator” with the Israeli state.But overall, he boasts, the reaction is positive: “Fingers crossed, we are on the right track.”

6 - Days before inauguration, National Guard troops stream to DC
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/2021/0116/Days-before-inauguration-National-Guard-troops-stream-to-DC
By the busload and planeload, National Guard troops were pouring into the nation’s capital on Saturday, as governors answered the urgent pleas of U.S. defense officials for more troops to help safeguard Washington even as they keep anxious eyes on possible violent protests in their own states.Military leaders spent chunks of Thursday evening and Friday calling states in an unprecedented appeal for more National Guard troops to help lock down much of the city in the days before President-elect Joe Biden’s inauguration. In dribs and drabs, governors responded, some agreeing to send an extra dozen, 100 or even 1,000, while others said no.The calls reflect fears that violent extremist groups are targeting the city in the wake of the deadly insurrection at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6. The threats range from armed insurgents to possible attempts to plant explosive devices at so-called soft targets. But as Washington begins to resemble an armed camp, with more than 25,000 Guard due in the city by early next week, concerns about violence at state capitals has grown.Oregon Gov. Kate Brown said she turned down the federal request to send at least 100 more National Guard troops to D.C. “I didn’t think that we could safely fill that commitment,” Governor Brown said. Oregon has already agreed to send 30 to Washington, but state leaders are worried about violence at the state capitol in Salem.Others agreed, setting off a dizzying torrent of military flights and convoys into the region.“The peaceful transfer of power is a central tenet of American democracy, and Connecticut stands ready to aid in the protection of our country,” said Connecticut Gov. Ned Lamont, who had initially approved sending 100 Guard and on Friday agreed to send 200 more.All told, more than 130 U.S. Air Guard flights in the past 72 hours have carried at least 7,000 Guard troops to Joint Base Andrews in Maryland, according to U.S. officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss internal numbers. Thousands more are in buses and military trucks, thundering up highways toward Washington.Army Gen. Dan Hokanson, chief of the National Guard Bureau, called adjutants general around the country, and others, such as Army Secretary Ryan McCarthy, called governors to seek help. Mr. McCarthy praised the states, saying defense and military officials are keenly aware of the threats they also are facing.“The governors and the TAGs have been great. They helped us a lot,” Mr. McCarthy told The Associated Press. “That’s the thing – that in the midst of a really horrible situation you’re seeing the greatness of this country, everybody coming together and help each other get through this.”What began in early January as a routine deployment of about 350 members of the D.C. National Guard to help with expected protests exploded over the past two weeks into a vastly greater operation to protect the inauguration and the U.S. Capitol, and to shut down access to the city and many of its historical monuments.As protesters stampeded their way into the Capitol on Jan. 6, only a bit more than 100 National Guard were scattered around the city, guarding checkpoints and Metro entrances. Hours later, five people were dead, the Capitol was in shambles and all 1,100 of D.C.’s Guard had been activated.By the next day, as information came in about more violence being planned, requests went out for 6,200 Guard members from the surrounding states.By Thursday night, as law enforcement and defense officials poured over maps and staged security drills, they concluded they would need at least 25,000 to adequately lock down the Capitol grounds and a wide swath of D.C., including the National Mall. And they agreed that the bulk of those Guard will be armed.At that point, the new round of calls to the state governors and military leaders began.Many governors were willing to help, but they made it clear that their own state capitals were their priority. Some agreed to send more, while others couldn’t. And the numbers varied widely.Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Wolf doubled his initial commitment of 1,000 to 2,000. Other states were able to scrape up an additional dozen.After reviewing the threats to its own state, Minnesota decided it could significantly increase its contribution and will send 850 Guard rather than the 130 initially tapped to go, according to the state’s adjutant general, Maj. Gen. Shawn Manke.Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine had already agreed to send 700. On Friday, he announced he’d be sending 300 more – even as he ordered nearly 600 to secure the Ohio statehouse in Columbus. Similarly, North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper initially agreed to send 200 Guard, and on Friday spokesman Ford Porter said the state will send 100 more. Iowa first said it was sending 250 and now the number is 265.The vast military response comes as Congress and law enforcement authorities are trying to figure out how the U.S. Capitol was overrun so dramatically on Jan. 6. Leaders of four committees in the Democratic-controlled House sent a letter Saturday requesting briefings and documents from the FBI and other federal agencies as part of their review of the insurrection.The appeals for more of America’s citizen soldiers also underscore the Pentagon’s limits on the use of active-duty troops. Under the law, they can’t be used for law enforcement, and officials are intent on avoiding the appearance of armed active-duty forces being used against U.S. citizens on American soil.Active-duty forces are routinely prepared to respond to emergencies in Washington, such as flight violations in restricted airspace over D.C., and a quick reaction force is always on standby. Other active-duty units will take part in various inaugural ceremonies.This story was reported by the Associated Press. Associated Press writers Andrew Selsky in Salem, Oregon; Susan Haigh in Hartford, Connecticut; Farnoush Amiri in Columbus, Ohio; Gary Robertson in Raleigh, North Carolina; Steve Karnowski in MInneapolis; David Pitt in Des Moines, Iowa, and Mark Scolforo in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, contributed to this report.

7 - Truth, lies, and insurrection. How falsehood shakes democracy.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/Politics/2021/0115/Truth-lies-and-insurrection.-How-falsehood-shakes-democracy
In the early morning hours of Nov. 4, 2020, President Donald Trump told possibly the most consequential falsehood of his life.The lie was that he had been reelected by American voters to a second term, despite tens of millions of votes still outstanding and rapidly narrowing margins in key states such as Michigan and Pennsylvania.“Frankly, we did win this election. We did win this election,” he said.The president had paved the way for this lie with others, saying for months that mail-in voting was rife with fraud and that he would only lose if Democrats stole the election. He solidified it in the months following Election Day, repeating and honing his words, convincing legions of supporters that they needed to help him “stop the steal.”What happened on Jan. 6 and in the days that followed spun directly out of the original falsity and its subsequent embellishment. Supporters stormed the Capitol, wrecking historic rooms, barely missing the chance to seize elected officials. President Trump was impeached by the House for inciting the riot. He now awaits a Senate trial on the charge, his Republican Party riven by the events, Democrats aghast and furious, and threats of further violence hanging in the air.It's a problem not unique to today's America. Its implications stem not just from one leader's actions but also from the psychology of followers and a fractured​​ political ​and media ​culture.​ ​And the answers may hinge not merely on efforts to hold Mr. Trump accountable but on the messages ​that others – notably ​his erstwhile political allies – ​choose from here​.Lies can be powerful. Some wear on the truth and lead those who want to believe into a parallel world more in accordance with their presuppositions. The notion that Mr. Trump actually won the election, and that a liberal-elite conspiracy is denying him a second term, is such a lie. It is not a “Big Lie,” in the sense of establishing an entire, sinister, and false view of the world, as did the Nazi myth that Germany lost World War I because Jews and socialists stabbed the nation in the back. But it is big enough to shake American democracy.Many GOP lawmakers helped perpetuate the president’s lie prior to last Wednesday’s Capitol riot. And many have declined to disavow it even after a mob rampaged through their chambers. Seven senators and 138 representatives voted to sustain objections to Pennsylvania’s Electoral College votes, for instance, even after seeing the damage rioters had done.Republicans who continue to support those challenges give the president’s falsehoods more credence and ensure they continue to spread through the rank-and-file. And disavowal of the president’s claim to victory by leaders the GOP base will listen to may be the only way to begin dousing the embers of the mob’s anger.President Trump himself on Wednesday released a video denouncing the Capitol violence, saying it stands against everything “our movement” believes in. However, he did not back down from his insistence that he was the election’s rightful winner.“If you want reconciliation, it’s first of all important to recognize the legitimacy of the election results,” says Michael Brenner, a professor of history at American University and author of the forthcoming book “In Hitler’s Munich: Jews, Antisemites, and the Rise of Nazism.”Lies surging around the worldIn some ways, last week’s Capitol riot is like the Munich Beer Hall Putsch of Nov. 8, 1923, a failed coup attempt by the Nazi party and Adolf Hitler, says Professor Brenner. In both, an outraged mob marched through the streets after a long and disjointed angry speech by their leader. In both there was violence, including broken windows, shots, and bloodshed. Order was eventually restored in both.Both also had falsehoods at their heart. The Nazis’ was a large one of national betrayal. President Trump’s is a narrow one of an allegedly stolen victory.“If you to set up your own truth because the real truth does not fit your political agenda, the lying is important,” says Professor Brenner. “That’s what we’re witnessing now.”Indeed, lying and deceit may be surging at the national level in other parts of the world.In Hungary populist leader Viktor Orban has attacked financier George Soros, a Hungarian-born Jew, as a shadowy force undermining the country. Evocations of a Jewish cabal controlling global money flows are among the oldest of anti-Semitic tropes.In Poland the conservative Law and Justice Party has pushed a wide-ranging conspiracy theory centered on allegations that a 2010 plane crash that killed many Polish officials - including the then-president, brother of the current president – was caused by Russia. Investigations by regional experts have all blamed bad weather and pilot error for the crash.Russian leader Vladimir Putin himself often makes false statements about matters big and small. Recently he insisted that journalists who exposed the role of Russian security services in poisoning opposition leader Aleksei Navalny were CIA operatives, for instance.Back in America, the false Dominion voting machine theory of voter fraud, a nearly impossible-to-follow tale that begins in Venezuela and ends with “back doors” and “vote shuffling” and allegations that the company is spiriting parts of its machines out of the country, is one sub-plot of the stolen-election conspiracy falsehood. The fact that it was ludicrously complicated and would have had to involve so many people it would be impossible to conceal did not stop President Trump from berating Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger for not taking it seriously in an extraordinary phone call earlier this month.Earlier this week, actor and former California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger accused President Trump of instigating the insurrection in the Capitol by misleading people with lies. Raised in a defeated Austria in the years following World War II, Mr. Schwarzenegger says his father and neighbors were also misled with lies, and suffered accordingly.“I know where such lies lead,” Mr. Schwarzenegger, a Republican, said.Who’s telling the truth?President Trump’s devoted followers do not think he is telling them lies. Many believe he is telling the real truth, and it is the media, especially the non-right-wing media, that is the greatest source of American falsehoods.In numerous interviews prior to Election Day, and even afterward, Monitor reporters heard from Trump voters that they were sure he had won. Many said they also believed President-elect Joe Biden would not be inaugurated on Jan. 20.Polls show the same story. While there has been erosion for President Trump in approval ratings since Jan. 6, even among Republicans, a sizable majority of members of the GOP still back his victory claim. A just-released poll by Pew Research finds that 64% of his supporters say Trump definitely or probably won the election. (Among all Americans, 65% say Mr. Biden won, and three-quarters believe Mr. Trump bears at least some responsibility for the Jan. 6 Capitol invasion.)Yet the evidence appears overwhelming. None of the dozens of court cases brought by the Trump campaign legal team succeeded. Former Attorney General Bill Barr said there was no widespread fraud, among other top officials. Georgia Secretary of State Raffensperger, a Republican, was among the officials of both parties who attested to their vote counts. Videos of alleged vote stuffing and boxes of ballots being delivered after the count and so forth were routinely exposed as benign legal procedures or not even about voting at all.Why the persistence of belief in Trump’s victory? Among the reasons, say experts: motivated reasoning, in which people reach conclusions they emotionally desire; and confirmation bias, in which people interpret new evidence as confirmation of one’s existing beliefs.When it comes to decisions, we think of ourselves as scientists, dispassionately weighing evidence to reach conclusions, says Jennifer Mercieca, a professor of rhetoric and expert in political discourse at Texas A&M University.“That’s not the case. Instead we are more like lawyers,” she says. “We already have a point and we look for evidence to support that point.”In addition, over the past 30 years or so a cold war has developed between historic legacy media and new right-wing media for the eyes and ears of voters. In that context Republicans have steadily grown more powerful, whatever their fortunes at the ballot box.With social media contributing to a deluge of information, political discourse becomes less a reasoned debate and more a display of spectacle, says Professor Mercieca. That’s something at which Mr. Trump excels.The Capitol mob itself was an example of this trend. As they breached barriers and stormed the halls of Congress it seemed every MAGA-hat wearer was also taking selfies, live-streaming, or otherwise creating content for their social media.As for President Trump, his loss of Twitter and other social media accounts must be a blow, taking away his means of speaking directly to his supporters and forcing him to depend on the news media to communicate.“He is dependent on them to carry his message. And for him dependency is weakness,” Professor Mercieca says.

8 - Incitement, sedition, and conspiracy – explaining Capitol crimes
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/Justice/2021/0115/Incitement-sedition-and-conspiracy-explaining-Capitol-crimes
The United States is in the middle of its most turbulent transition of governments in over a century.On Jan. 6 hundreds of rioters invaded the U.S. Capitol, disrupting the constitutionally mandated counting of electoral votes by Congress and resulting in five deaths. Federal law enforcement has warned of potential violent demonstrations at every state capitol ahead of President-elect Joe Biden’s inauguration next week.The immediate political consequences could soon be resolved – though the aftershocks will linger. The House of Representatives this week, in a bipartisan vote, impeached President Donald Trump for a historic second time for “incitement of insurrection.” Next comes a trial in the Senate.The legal consequences, however, may not be known for months. Criminal investigations into the Capitol invasion are underway both federally and locally, and the significance of these investigations should not be underestimated, says Joyce Vance, a former U.S. attorney who teaches at the University of Alabama School of Law.“The work that’s ahead of the Justice Department in determining if it’s something that just sort of organically erupted, or ... if there was a conspiracy that wanted to overthrow a legitimately elected government,” she adds, “has to rank up there as the most significant investigation the Justice Department has taken on.”The U.S. House of Representatives this week, in a bipartisan vote, impeached President Donald Trump for a historic second time for “incitement of insurrection.” Next comes a trial in the U.S. Senate.Does President Trump face legal jeopardy then?With regard to Jan. 6 itself, the answer is still maybe. The president obviously wasn’t part of the mob that broke into and ransacked the Capitol, but his speech at a rally hours before the riot – and possibly his actions, or lack of action, during it – could potentially be prosecuted.The First Amendment protects many kinds of speech, but not all kinds of speech. For prosecutors to prove that the president incited the mob to invade the Capitol they would have to prove – beyond a reasonable doubt – that he was both trying to encourage immediate lawbreaking and that his words were likely to produce that lawbreaking. (The relevant Supreme Court precedent, for those curious, is Brandenburg v. Ohio.)That’s a very high burden, which is why many legal experts are skeptical that we could see Mr. Trump prosecuted for inciting the Capitol invasion. That case could also have such a sizable effect on the free speech rights of Americans generally that prosecutors may be wary of touching it.Great, so Mr. Trump is in the clear.Criminally, regarding Jan. 6 specifically, he probably is. (Two caveats: Impeachment is a political process, and a Senate trial operates differently from a criminal trial. Also, the DOJ is investigating the extent to which the Capitol invasion was planned in advance. If they can prove that it was, and if they can prove that the president was somehow personally involved, all bets are off.)What Mr. Trump should be more worried about, legal experts say, is criminal exposure on other fronts. He is already fighting investigations by prosecutors in New York into his personal finances, as well as multiple defamation lawsuits from women who have accused him of sexual assault.Then there are more recent actions. Legal experts point to his Jan. 2 phone call to Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger, asking the state official to “find” votes that would flip the presidential election result in the state in his favor, as a potential violation of state and federal election law.“It’s a better case for him to be charged with attempting to engage in election fraud,” says Ilya Somin, a professor at George Mason University’s Antonin Scalia Law School. “By all means I say go after Trump, but go after him in ways that don’t risk harming the civil liberties of ordinary people.”Isn’t it rare for former presidents to be prosecuted?It’s not just rare, it’s never happened.This isn’t because former presidents have some form of special protection. But since the country was founded, Americans have been wary of criminalizing politics, and presidents have been wary of criminalizing their predecessors.Given his potential legal exposure, this could be another norm the Trump presidency breaks. It will represent a challenge for President-elect Biden. He has pledged to restore the independence of the DOJ – an agency that lies within the executive branch but that is designed to represent the American people as a whole – after problematic behavior during the Trump administration. His administration prosecuting his predecessor would, at the very least, look bad.But the Justice Department’s prosecutorial decision-making “has to be independent,” says Chuck Rosenberg, a former U.S. attorney and senior FBI official.“How hard is that to become independent? It’s not that hard. The president just has to stay the [heck] out of it,” he adds.What about other people? What legal trouble are they in?Short answer: lots. Longer answer: With charges still coming in, the specifics are unclear.There have been 275 federal and local cases filed in connection to the Capitol invasion, Michael Sherwin, acting U.S. attorney for Washington, D.C., said at a press conference Friday. Mr. Sherwin added that he expects the number to grow.Most of the charges filed so far have been relatively minor, such as engaging in disorderly conduct on Capitol grounds, unlawful entry, and violating curfew under the district’s criminal code. But those are just initial charges. As law enforcement gathers and reviews more evidence, more indictments and charges will be filed. Existing charges could also be upgraded or downgraded.Treason (defined in the Constitution as “levying war” against the United States or giving “aid and comfort” to its enemies) and insurrection (essentially defined as engaging in a rebellion against the government) are both rarely charged in general and unlikely to be charged here.But Mr. Sherwin did confirm this week that a “strike force” of senior prosecutors is building seditious conspiracy charges. A crime with a long and controversial history of criminalizing political dissent, “seditious conspiracy” is defined as conspiring to “levy war” against the U.S. government, or attempting to “hinder or delay the execution” of U.S. law, or trying to “seize, take, or possess” government property. “It’s a very serious charge, and one we don’t see often,” says Kami Chavis, a former assistant U.S. attorney who directs the Criminal Justice Program at Wake Forest University. “We’ll have to wait for the evidence investigators uncover to prove that against certain individuals.”Sounds ominous. What will we see happen now?This is likely to be a sprawling and complex investigation. Every FBI field office is working on it. And experts say a big challenge for law enforcement will be simply identifying everyone who was involved.Agents will be studying video footage, following up on tips, looking at social media postings and relationship charts, and interviewing witnesses and suspects. It will be like investigating the mafia, says David Gomez, a former assistant special agent-in-charge in the FBI’s Seattle field office. “If you believe you have a criminal enterprise conspiracy you work your way up from the bottom and find out who leaders are,” he adds.When the time comes to go to court – and the pandemic has disrupted jury trials across the country – they will mostly be tried in federal and local court in Washington. Expect a lot of plea bargains, though.It’s also important to note that the FBI isn’t obliged, nor likely, to share every detail of these investigations – particularly bigger and more sensitive aspects like whether the Capitol riot was planned.

9 - Leading a tied Senate: Can Schumer pull it off?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/Politics/2021/0115/Leading-a-tied-Senate-Can-Schumer-pull-it-off
Chuck Schumer is used to drinking from a firehose. But the incoming United States Senate majority leader has never taken on such a torrent of challenges, with the opening days of both the Biden administration and Democratic control of the Senate coming at the very moment an impeachment trial gets underway.A 38-year veteran of Congress who first came to the Senate during President Bill Clinton’s impeachment, Mr. Schumer is a bundle of energy with one overriding mandate: Help President-elect Joe Biden become a successful president. To do so, he’ll have to leverage the narrowest possible majority – a 50-50 Senate with the incoming vice president, Kamala Harris, delivering the tie-breaking vote.It’s a tough assignment. It’s far easier, though often unsatisfying, to be a minority leader equipped with the tools of obstruction than it is to be a majority leader armed mostly with persuasion. But the goodwill Mr. Schumer enjoys with key members, and his careful management of the party’s constituencies, could help ease the way.“Chuck Schumer has done a remarkable job as our caucus leader the last four years holding our caucus together,” said a beaming Sen. Chris Coons, D-Del., as he entered the Senate chamber during last Wednesday’s Electoral College count, speaking just before a mob of violent supporters of President Donald Trump assaulted the Capitol and the situation turned dire. It was the day after the twin Georgia runoff elections unexpectedly delivered control to Democrats.Then Mr. Schumer appeared. “What did I just give a quote about? Our capable majority leader!” Senator Coons said.“Again!” a jubilant Mr. Schumer exclaimed. “More adjectives! More adjectives!”Less than an hour later, Mr. Schumer was in peril – on the Senate floor – under the protection of a Capitol Police officer with a submachine gun standing between him and GOP leader Mitch McConnell as the mob breached the building.The ransacking of the Capitol has brought impeachment to the Senate’s door again and set Republicans on their heels. And it’s put a spotlight on whether the polarized, diminished chamber can process Mr. Biden’s agenda.Take the installation of Mr. Biden’s Cabinet. The Senate has traditionally tried to confirm a batch of the most important nominees on Inauguration Day, Jan. 20, and the days thereafter. But to do so requires the cooperation of the entire Senate.Democrats slow-walked many of Mr. Trump’s Cabinet picks four years ago after a crushing election loss, but there’s a palpable sense that Republicans may be more cooperative now, at least when confirming national security nominees and picks like Janet Yellen to run the Treasury Department.Mr. Schumer seeks – and is used to operating in – the spotlight, whether he’s helping run the unwieldy, increasingly divided Senate, micromanaging his beloved Democratic caucus or crisscrossing New York.Any of these is a full-time job. And they don’t always point him in the same direction. For instance, Mr. Biden is preaching bipartisanship, and Mr. Schumer wants to help, but tensions are inevitable with ardent progressives such as Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, an ambitious Bronx Democrat whom Schumer allies are watching closely as he runs for a fifth term in 2022.Mr. Schumer was a force in Mr. Biden’s decision to “go big” on Thursday with a $1.9 trillion COVID-19 relief and economic stimulus bill that was bigger than earlier Biden drafts. Progressives hailed the measure.Meanwhile, the prospect of an impeachment trial in the opening days of Mr. Biden’s term adds a huge degree of uncertainty. Senate rules are unforgiving, but Mr. Schumer and Mr. McConnell are hoping to establish a dual-track process to confirm nominations even as the trial unfolds.Mr. McConnell and Mr. Schumer have a tortured, tense relationship after years of bruising political battles and fights over Supreme Court nominees. They rarely talk spontaneously and have no hesitation in slinging barbs that earlier generations of leaders managed to avoid.But Mr. Biden and Mr. McConnell are long-standing friends, and the Kentucky Republican – pondering a “guilty” vote in Mr. Trump’s second impeachment trial and still absorbing the disastrous Senate losses in Georgia – appears inclined to help Mr. Biden as best he can.The events of the past week, as damaging and unsettling as they were for the country, seem likely to assist Mr. Biden and Mr. Schumer. What is more, Democratic control of the chamber comes with filibuster-proof treatment of Mr. Biden’s nominees, with only a simple majority needed, though Republicans could easily force delays.Mr. McConnell and his Republican caucus want to “reasonably cooperate on the national security nominations,” said Hazen Marshall, a former McConnell policy aide. “His view has traditionally been that presidents deserve their staff, unless their staff are crazy or criminals.” But GOP senators are sure to drag their feet on less urgent Cabinet posts given the experience under Mr. Trump, when even former Sen. Dan Coats, R-Ind., had to endure delays.But with the economy slipping and the public appalled by the melee in Washington, GOP resistance to Mr. Biden’s $1.9 trillion COVID-19 relief package or his slate of Cabinet picks may not be as resolute.“There’s a lot to do, but Democrats are on the right side of all of it,” said former Schumer strategist and confidant Matt House. “These are good problems to have.”Amid the dizzying pace, Mr. Schumer also tends to New York. A Brooklyn native, Mr. Schumer makes a visit to each of the state’s 62 counties every year. And his spur-of-the-moment visits to local events like high school graduations and, more recently, unannounced drop-ins on community Zoom calls are the stuff of legend.Last Thursday, little more than 24 hours after the Capitol riot, Mr. Schumer hopped on a call with a community board in Sunnyside, Queens. He spent the opening minutes thanking board members. “You guys and gals do a great job – I know what it’s like,” Mr. Schumer said, according to the Sunnyside Post. “When things go bad you hear about it; when things are great you hear nothing.”And after Mr. Trump’s impeachment Wednesday, Mr. Schumer heaped praise on local New York media members in a call with publishers and broadcasters thanking him for steering stimulus dollars to struggling news outlets, according to an account by the Syracuse Post Standard. But he had to jump.“Pelosi has called me and Biden, so I won’t be able to be on for too long,” Mr. Schumer said.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

10 - ‘We have to multitask’: How impeachment affects Biden’s agenda
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/Politics/2021/0115/We-have-to-multitask-How-impeachment-affects-Biden-s-agenda
President-elect Joe Biden already faces the daunting task of steering a newly announced $1.9 trillion coronavirus relief bill through a closely divided United States Congress as the pandemic and its economic fallout grow.Now Mr. Biden will have to do it with President Donald Trump’s impeachment trial beginning potentially as soon as his first day in office.The confluence of events amounts to one of the most politically and logistically complicated openings to a new administration in modern history, requiring Mr. Biden to try to move the country into a post-Trump era even as senators debate Mr. Trump’s most divisive acts.“It’s going to be incredibly challenging,” said former Arkansas Sen. Mark Pryor, a Democrat. “There’s only so much bandwidth in the Congress.”Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, who will have a significant role to play in ushering Mr. Biden’s agenda through the Senate as chair of the Budget Committee, underscored how much is on Democrats’ plate during Mr. Biden’s first few months in office.“We don’t have the time to spend an enormous amount of time on impeachment, and then we’re going to go to Biden’s nominees and then we have to deal with legislation,” the independent senator said. “We’re going to have to move simultaneously in a whole bunch of areas.”In an interview with NPR, Vice President-elect Kamala Harris expressed confidence in the Senate.“We know how to multitask,” she said. “There’s a reason that word exists in the English language. That’s what’s going to be required. We have to multitask, which means, as with anyone, we have a lot of priorities and we need to see them through.”Mr. Biden has so far stayed largely out of public deliberations over Mr. Trump’s impeachment for inciting a riot. After the House vote, Mr. Biden was forceful in denouncing the violent attack on the Capitol that precipitated the impeachment charge, but he also said he’d work as president to ensure Americans “stand together as a nation” – and called on the Senate to “find a way to deal with their constitutional responsibilities on impeachment while also working on the other urgent business of this nation.”His hands-off approach to the matter is in keeping with his stance throughout the campaign and into his transition, even as Mr. Trump’s ever-growing controversies have overwhelmed the news cycle.Mr. Biden took his time in endorsing the first impeachment of Mr. Trump in 2019, only expressing support for the move weeks after House Speaker Nancy Pelosi launched the formal effort. Decades before, when Richard Nixon was impeached, Mr. Biden cautioned his Senate colleagues to consider the weight of the moment and give Mr. Nixon a fair trial.Democrats on Capitol Hill say they largely want to see Mr. Biden continue his even-keeled approach and focus on his agenda, rather than on impeachment, once he enters office.“President-elect Biden has a big job. So let him do his job – and let the Senate do their work,” said California Rep. Barbara Lee, a Democrat.But once the proceedings start, it’s certain to be tougher for Mr. Biden to completely avoid them, with the trial dominating the news cycle and forcing his former opponent back into the spotlight, even as Mr. Biden tries to stay focused on the coronavirus pandemic.And there’s the prospect they could further exacerbate the already fraught atmosphere on Capitol Hill, politicizing Mr. Biden’s agenda and making it tougher for him to get support from winnable Republican senators.“Trump’s most fervent supporters are going to have an opportunity to attack Democrats, not for their programs and not for their ideas, but as the evil caricature that they have come to portray them,” said Jeffrey Engel, director of the Center for Presidential History at Southern Methodist University. “People who were potentially gettable as votes for some of Biden’s legislative agenda are going to be much more hesitant to go along with Democratic plans while Democrats are openly being vilified.”Mr. Biden was known as a dealmaker in the Senate and has long relationships with many Republican senators after his 36-year career there. He’s also been in touch with leadership of both parties during the transition. But as Virginia Sen. Mark Warner points out, there’s the risk that impeachment poisons the well for Mr. Biden with those senators who don’t know him well.“At least half the Republican caucus has never served with Joe Biden,” said Mr. Warner, a Democrat. “His ability to navigate with those new members, if their first impression is driven by what could end up being decided on partisan lines, that’s going to make his job more difficult.”For now, Mr. Biden is staying focused on his agenda.On Thursday, in announcing his COVID-19 relief package, he emphasized that he hopes to work with lawmakers from both parties and expressed optimism that despite the $1.9 trillion price tag, “we’re ready to get this done.”“I know what I just described does not come cheaply, but we simply can’t afford not to do what I’m proposing,” Mr. Biden said.And Democrats on Capitol Hill are barreling ahead as well, refusing to accept the prospect that impeachment will deter them from their legislative goals.“What the Senate is going to have to do is show the world that it can walk and chew gum at the same time,” Mr. Sanders said.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

11 - Overcoming racism
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/A-Christian-Science-Perspective/2021/0115/Overcoming-racism
While there have been notable signs of progress over the years, racism remains an issue across the globe. We’ve compiled some pieces from The Christian Science Publishing Society’s archives that highlight the value of prayer in overcoming racism. Within each one you’ll find ideas to inspire your own prayers and actions to further brotherly love, equality, and justice.In a podcast called “The path to discovering our divine rights,” a woman talks about how she worked for change in the 1960s U.S. civil rights movement, and how she sees the First Commandment as a healing force that can help bring more uniform justice into the world today.The author of “Can racism be healed?” shares how we can all play a part in healing racism by meeting every temptation to feel inferior or superior to someone else with the powerful recognition of everyone’s identity as a child of God.The author of “Inherently worthy” explores how realizing that everyone has innate value as God’s child empowers us to fearlessly love others in a way that can turn a menacing situation around, and recounts an encounter with the Ku Klux Klan in which her grandmother experienced this firsthand.In “An interview: on racial prejudice,” which was published during the civil rights era in the U.S., a Black businessman and Christian Scientist shares ideas on overcoming racism.In “How can Christian Science help me address racism as a non-Black person?” the author considers how prayer can help us become more aware of ways we might inadvertently be participating in oppressive behavior, and empower us to move toward redemption and change.“Reaching beyond resistance” explores how a spiritual starting point opens the door for inward change that leads to outward progress in civil rights and other areas.

12 - How young Africans find liberation
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/the-monitors-view/2021/0115/How-young-Africans-find-liberation
When Africans began to shake off colonial rule six decades ago and formed independent states, new leaders used their roles in the liberation to justify their hold on power. Now a new generation of Africans has flipped the script. They want liberation from leaders who frequently overstay their welcome.The latest example is Uganda, where a musician from the ghettos of Kampala was able to mount a challenge to President Yoweri Museveni – who has ruled for 35 years – in a tightly controlled election on Thursday. This challenger’s popularity is based in large part on his understanding of what motivates young Africans struggling for genuine democracy – a desire for equality and truthfulness.“I know so many freedom fighters have been through the doors of jail, but again, they walked out free, and I know that truth wins always,” said Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, who is widely known as Bobi Wine, in an interview with OkayAfrica.He was not referring to the giants of Africa’s liberation struggles like Nelson Mandela, but the Ugandan poets and opposition leaders who – like himself – have been jailed and tortured for challenging Mr. Museveni.Fair elections are still rare in Africa even two decades after its leaders adopted a set of principles for democracy. Despite the slow progress, sitting presidents in Liberia, South Africa, Senegal, and Gambia have given up power peacefully. In 2017 Kenya’s Supreme Court forced a new presidential election after the first vote was marred by violence. Last year a court in Malawi annulled a fraudulent election.Those developments show democratic norms are taking root. But they remain the exception. That may explain why public support for democracy remains tentative. A survey by the Ichikowitz Family Foundation in 14 countries last year found that while African youth are optimistic about the future, they are divided when asked to choose between stable government and democracy. According to a poll by Afrobarometer, only 14% of Africans said they trusted opposition parties “a lot,” while 34% expressed “no trust at all.”As a member of parliament, Mr. Wine has challenged the ruling party on a number of fronts, such as Mr. Museveni’s effort to change the constitution to enable him to seek a sixth term. For this he was arrested. Upon his release, he wrote a new song with these words: “What was the purpose of the liberation / When we can’t have a peaceful transition?”In November, security forces shot 54 people protesting his detention. Before the election, he was banned from campaigning and performing. His driver was killed. Despite these setbacks, his idealism keeps inspiring young Ugandans.“Do not fear, because fear is the only barrier between us and the country we want to live in,” he told them in a Deutsche Welle documentary. And in a message to the president, he said, “I want you to know that this is not a war. We don’t hate you.”Such words help young Africans liberate themselves first before challenging the traditional “big men” who cling to power. Mr. Wine may not officially win Thursday’s election. Vote rigging remains the norm. But he’s won it in many other ways.

13 - George Wallace, Martin Luther King Jr., and the power of forgiveness
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/2021/0114/George-Wallace-Martin-Luther-King-Jr.-and-the-power-of-forgiveness
As this year’s Martin Luther King Jr. Day approached, my thoughts turned to George Wallace, who for years as governor of Alabama opposed King at every turn – and then apologized.The pathos of Wallace’s full-circle story took me away from weighing and measuring whether one deserves forgiveness to the artesian dimensions of the heart, where only unconditional love flows.Questions like “How much should I forgive?” or “How many times can I forgive?” became totally useless. And in the absence of questions, came the answer: Love is the only path toward a sustainable world. Forgiveness controls the future.Bending 1950s-era injusticesAs a young man, King learned from his father, the pastor of Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, about the power of the Black church as an unending source of faith to drive social change.And that’s exactly what King did at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, in Montgomery, Alabama, where he began as pastor in September 1954.While preaching a theology of true freedom, he facilitated nonviolent protests like the Montgomery Bus Boycott, bending 1950s-era injustices toward the nation’s ideal that “all men are created equal.”Even George Wallace knew the power of the Dexter church. The current organist, Althea Thomas, who was hired by King in her 20s, remembers Wallace coming to the church to court Black voters during his first gubernatorial run in 1958, which he lost.Four years later, he ran as a staunch segregationist, winning by a landslide.“Segregation forever”In his inaugural address at the Alabama Capitol in 1963, Wallace famously pledged, “Segregation now, segregation tomorrow, and segregation forever!” A rallying cry against racial equality, his words haunted him.“I didn’t write those words about segregation now, tomorrow and forever,” Wallace told reporter Carl Rowan in 1991. “I saw them in the speech written for me and planned to skip over them. But the wind-chill factor was 5 below zero when I gave that speech. I started reading just to get it over and read those words without thinking. I have regretted it all my life.”Despite those regrets, Wallace behaved as though he believed what he’d said. He forcefully opposed integrating Alabama’s schools and never punished the state troopers who, on March 7, 1965, turned a peaceful march across the Edmund Pettis Bridge into what came to be known as Bloody Sunday. Footage of troopers brutally beating voting rights marchers shocked the nation. King’s turn to speak at the Capitol A few weeks later, in the wake of that shock, marchers once again left Selma headed for Montgomery, having secured federal protection from the National Guard. By the time they reached the state Capitol four days later, their ranks had swelled to 25,000.  Atop the white dome flew the Confederate flag, and to the left of the building stood an imposing statue of Jefferson Davis, president of the Confederacy. But King’s stature loomed larger than Davis’s statue. King had been chosen as Time’s Man of the Year for 1963, and in 1964 he became the youngest person ever to win the Nobel Peace Prize.At a rally at the Capitol, King delivered his famous “How Long? Not Long.” speech. Less than five months later, President Lyndon Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act, giving King one of the pens as a memento.An apology at DexterDexter Avenue Baptist Church is less than half a mile from the Alabama Capitol, yet it took an attempted assassination that left Wallace paralyzed for him to visit Dexter again. In 1979, he entered in a wheelchair, unannounced, to apologize.His words were simple and contrite: “I have learned what suffering means. In a way that was impossible [before the shooting], I think I can understand something of the pain black people have come to endure. I know I contributed to that pain, and I can only ask your forgiveness.” King was not there, of course, having been assassinated more than a decade earlier, but the congregation forgave Wallace.When I imagine King’s response had he been present, part of his Christmas 1957 sermon comes to mind: “Forgiveness does not mean ignoring what has been done or putting a false label on an evil act. It means, rather, that the evil act no longer remains as a barrier to the relationship. ... While abhorring segregation, we shall love the segregationist. This is the only way to create the beloved community.”  A hint of King’s dream come trueI never met King or Wallace, but I know Wallace’s older daughter, Peggy Wallace Kennedy. When I emailed to ask about her father’s change of heart, she responded, “Daddy’s acts of contrition were real and for the right reasons. For it was his own Journey to Jericho that led him home. … [I]t was his own suffering as a paraplegic that carried him to a higher ground of peace and understanding. I believe that Daddy’s transformation later in his life affected the hearts of both African Americans and Whites, in America.”  At a 2015 event marking the 50th anniversary of the Selma to Montgomery march, Ms. Kennedy stood on the Alabama Capitol steps holding hands with King’s younger daughter, Bernice King, watching the marchers approach. Recalling that day and alluding to King’s “I Have a Dream” speech, Ms. Kennedy wrote in her book, “The Broken Road: George Wallace and a Daughter’s Journey to Reconciliation,” “I could not help but wonder how the course of history might have been changed if Martin Luther King and Daddy had known that one day, right down here in Alabama, that little black girl and that little white girl holding hands would be their own daughters.”Wallace’s full-circle journey has taught me the truth of King’s words: “Love is the only force capable of transforming an enemy into a friend.”No weighing or measuring needed.

14 - God’s help is here
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/A-Christian-Science-Perspective/2021/0114/God-s-help-is-here
Used only occasionally today, there is a word found in the Bible that is quite comforting and encouraging: succor. It means to run to give assistance and support.When facing hardship or distress, no one wants to wait around for help. At such times I’ve been encouraged by this biblical description of the kind of undelayed help that God provides: “In the day of salvation have I succoured thee: behold, now is the accepted time” (II Corinthians 6:2).Yes, the “accepted” time for God’s help is now, not then. God’s schedule isn’t a calendar of years. It isn’t a period of months, days, or even hours. It is the timeless eternity of now. This means that God’s essential goodness isn’t constricted by events, people, red tape, or luck.How does God succor us? For starters, by changing our thoughts. A change of perspective prompted by God is answered prayer, because what we understand of God, good, greatly impacts what we experience. A clearer understanding of God and our relation to God brings tangible help and healing.For instance, when the mother-in-law of his close friend was sick and feverish, Jesus “came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and immediately the fever left her” (Mark 1:31).The immediacy of God’s succor is obvious there. Jesus’ understanding of God’s healing love opened the door for that love to be instantly felt. This holy assistance is the Christ, the comforting influence of God that transforms thought, revealing the universal presence of God’s goodness and wholeness. Jesus manifested this Christ-spirit so fully that he is known as Christ Jesus.Everyone is able today, like Jesus did then, to turn to the Christ for a healing change of thought, which also changes our lives. More than willpower or positive thinking, Christ makes clear to us that God’s goodness is the only legitimate presence and force.I experienced God’s succor in a striking way when I was playing in a college baseball game. As I was sliding into a base, I inadvertently jammed my thumb and found that I could only move it slightly. It also hurt, and right away I began praying.I knew from reading the Bible that God is not just a future help, but “a very present help in trouble” (Psalms 46:1). This “present help,” I realized, was right there to change my thought and outlook about this situation.Mary Baker Eddy’s book about Christian healing, “Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures,” explains: “When an accident happens, you think or exclaim, ‘I am hurt!’ Your thought is more powerful than your words, more powerful than the accident itself, to make the injury real” (p. 397). Then Mrs. Eddy goes on to talk about how a prayerful, confident recognition of God’s allness brings healing.During the game, I took exactly that approach. As I prayed, I soon saw that in God there are no accidents or dislocations, and this applies to God’s children, too. An injured thumb just isn’t part of the invulnerable spiritual goodness and wholeness that God is imparting to each of us, not just in a future time, but right now, immediately!I felt gently succored by God’s boundless, unrestricted goodness and loving presence. I knew that I was on my way to healing. Indeed, complete healing came quickly: By the very next morning, the swelling and discoloration were gone, and I was able to play baseball comfortably – our team had a double-header, in fact. I still remember the joy of playing on that happy day.On a broader scale, in a time when the world may seem filled with turbulence, God is still here to succor us. We don’t need to sit around waiting for the bad to end. God’s goodness is never suppressed. It is always present, and it’s always enough, because it is literally infinite, all. Through prayer inspired by God we begin to grasp that we have ceaseless God-given goodness, wholeness, ability, and opportunity. Mentally yielding to this Christ message empowers us to experience those qualities immediately and tangibly.Some more great ideas! To read or listen to an article on elevating society through prayer, please click through to a recent article on www.JSH-Online.com titled “Counteracting chaos and disorder.” There is no paywall for this content.

15 - George Shultz and Robert Gates offer advice to the Biden team
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/2021/0114/George-Shultz-and-Robert-Gates-offer-advice-to-the-Biden-team
We’ve been seeing the stories for weeks now. Former government officials and influencers of all political persuasions have been giving President-elect Joe Biden and Vice President-elect Kamala Harris lots of advice. Suggestions include whom to hire, which policies to pursue, and even how to decorate a Cabinet secretary’s office.George Shultz celebrated his 100th birthday last month. The former treasury secretary in the Nixon administration told a virtual audience at the U.S. Institute of Peace that he had shared an idea in a note to incoming Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen. Dr. Shultz said that he described the portrait of Alexander Hamilton that hangs in the treasury secretary’s office. In the painting, America’s very first secretary of the treasury has his hand out. “I got a lot of mileage out of that,” Dr. Shultz chuckled.His attempt at humor was the rare moment of levity in the think tank and nongovernmental organization meetings I have attended of late. Overall, the consensus is that America and the world are facing a perilous moment in history, and Mr. Biden’s team is facing a critical mission to restore the U.S. reputation for integrity, compassion, and toughness.Similar advice from experienced statesmenWhile wishing Mr. Biden well, Dr. Shultz urged the president-elect and his incoming foreign policy advisers to avoid making empty threats, warning “never point a rifle unless you’re willing to pull the trigger.”His caution echoed the views of former Defense Secretary Robert Gates. In the final chapter of his new book, “Exercise of Power,” Dr. Gates passes along advice given to Gen. George Marshall and Gen. Dwight Eisenhower by their World War I mentor, Maj. Gen. Fox Conner: “Never fight unless you have to, never fight alone, and never fight for long.”When I asked him about the quote, Dr. Gates warned that democracies can sustain wartime sacrifices for only a limited period. He observed that Americans have opposed every war except the first three years of World War II, and by the fall of 1944, even Franklin Roosevelt was facing “war fatigue” on the homefront. It’s a phenomenon that we’re seeing right now in the war against COVID-19. War fatigue is also a factor in the current administration’s efforts to pull U.S. troops out of Afghanistan and Iraq.A defense secretary across political partiesDr. Gates holds a unique place in American history. As secretary of defense from 2006 to 2011, he is the only person to serve in that position under presidents from different political parties.On Nov. 17, 2020, I had the privilege of interviewing Dr. Gates when I hosted the first Virtual Gala of the National Committee on American Foreign Policy. Dr. Gates was presented with NCAFP’s prestigious Hans J. Morgenthau Award. Previous recipients have included Mr. Biden, Dr. Shultz, and Henry Kissinger, who launched the gala with taped congratulations for Dr. Gates.I talked with Dr. Gates just a few hours after President Donald Trump announced plans to halve the number of U.S. troops in Afghanistan and Iraq. The news worried him, in part because of risks to the remaining American forces from extremists in both countries. Indeed, just hours after the announcement, there were rocket attacks near the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad. Dr. Gates also expressed concern that the withdrawal would leave billions of dollars of unprotected U.S. equipment behind, all because the decision to leave was so hasty.Calling for repair and reformDr. Gates stressed that from January 2001 until he retired in July 2011 there were just two defense secretaries. He lamented the rapid turnover and short tenures of his multiple successors in the nine years since, which has harmed their ability “to reform or manage or lead” because of their inability to establish credibility within the military. “It’s time to repair this constant turnover,” he concluded.Dr. Gates named other relationships that President-elect Biden will need to repair. He listed international groups, like the World Health Organization, as well as the U.S. intelligence community, an organization Dr. Gates knows well, given his leadership of the CIA during the George H.W. Bush administration. He also called for reforms within the State Department, which, he said, “has faced the same hollowing out as the civilian forces within the Pentagon.”Overall, Dr. Gates called for the restructuring and reform of a strategic framework. For the sake of America’s security, he said the U.S. needs to act in a strategically coherent manner. And the first step is to repair relationships with America’s allies, relationships that have been damaged during the last four years. “That’s the United States’ unique strength,” he said, observing that “Russia and China have no allies, just client states.”An appreciation for young peopleIt was a sobering conversation, but we ended on an uplifting note. Over the last 15 years, Dr. Gates has toggled between public service and leadership roles at Texas A&M University and William & Mary, his alma mater. I wondered if faculty fights reminded him of disagreements within the Pentagon. He laughed and said no. The common thread was and remains the young people with whom he is in contact.On college campuses, he said, he appreciates the thousands and thousands of 18- to 25-year-olds wearing T-shirts and flip flops and backpacks. At the Pentagon, he led 18- to 25-year-olds “wearing full body armor, carrying rifles, putting their lives at risk and dreams on hold to benefit and protect those kids back on college campuses.” Dr. Gates said he feels a special affinity for the students as well as “the amazing young people who lifted their right hands, swearing to protect this country and our Constitution.”Jacqueline Adams is co-author of “A Blessing: Women of Color Teaming Up to Lead, Empower and Thrive."

16 - CEOs spurn Trump and his allies: How big a blow?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2021/0115/CEOs-spurn-Trump-and-his-allies-How-big-a-blow
The stunning Capitol riot has engendered its own remarkable reaction: Corporate America is voicing anger about the violence and the Republican “stolen election” rhetoric that accompanied it.From pointed statements to voiding contracts to pausing political contributions, corporations and other entities have made their positions known in ways that would have seemed unthinkable two weeks ago. The immediate damage to President Donald Trump’s reputation is evident as staunch business allies like Deutsche Bank pull away from him and social media companies “deplatform” him by suspending his accounts. Corporations may be reflecting public opinion as much as leading it. A new Pew Research Center poll finds Mr. Trump is leaving the White House with the lowest job approval of his presidency (29%) and that 68% of Americans do not want him to remain a political figure after leaving office. Still, the corporate voices are important. The public currently bestows greater trust in business than in politicians. The damage could be long term to Mr. Trump – and to politicians who continue to support him.The question is how broad and persistent a corporate backlash will be. Corporations, after all, have a history of funding politicians in concert with their efforts to lobby for influence over legislation.“This is primarily a symbolic move as a way to send a signal to the Republican Party that the violence that we saw ... is simply not acceptable in a democracy,” says David Primo, a professor of political science and business administration at the University of Rochester. “There was genuine outrage. But the responses were very carefully calibrated. ... They wanted to buy themselves flexibility.”One of the early political casualties appears to be Doug Steinhardt, a gung-ho pro-Trump New Jersey attorney who suddenly suspended his campaign for governor on Monday, citing “unforeseen professional obligations.”Other pro-Trump candidates may face similar decisions in the coming weeks and months, at least in heavily Democratic states, as they feel out the electorate and the corporations that might – or might not – donate to their campaigns. “Symbolically, it’s important that the Republican Party discovers that they cannot rely on Home Depot and other corporations,” says Jerry Davis, professor of management and organizations at the University of Michigan’s Ross School of Business. But “that’s a very old-school big business response. What’s interesting to me is that tech responds by deplatforming.”The corporate backlash has been uncharacteristically direct. “[W]e believe the President’s behavior – including encouraging an assault on the Capitol and attempting to overturn the results of a legitimate, democratic election – deserves the strongest possible condemnation,” the Business Roundtable said in a statement Wednesday.Corporations’ financial moves have also been direct, potentially hitting Mr. Trump’s ability to get out his message on at least three fronts.Most immediately, they hit Mr. Trump and his business in the pocketbook at a time when his golf and hotel properties were already struggling because of the pandemic. According to Forbes estimates, his net worth fell from $4.5 billion a few months before his 2016 election to $2.5 billion today. Deutsche Bank, a key longtime lender to the Trump Organization, reportedly said it was cutting its ties to the business. New York’s Signature Bank said it was closing Mr. Trump’s personal accounts. New York City is moving to cancel its contracts with the company to run skating rinks, a carousel, and a golf course. PGA of America on Sunday announced it would no longer hold its 2022 championship on Mr. Trump’s golf course in New Jersey.The operations of the privately owned Trump Organization are so opaque that it’s hard to tell how meaningful these losses are. What is clear is that the Trump brand has taken a big hit because of the Capitol riot. From the pandemic to his controversial presidency and reported large business debts, the risks to the Trump corporate empire are significant. “What may be disastrous for Trump is being seen as a failed businessman and being seen as a dishonest businessman,” says Ciara Torres-Spelliscy, a fellow at New York University’s Brennan Center for Justice and author of the 2019 book “Political Brands,” which examines the 2016 election.The Manhattan District Attorney’s Office is investigating the Trump Organization for criminal activity.Lost megaphonePerhaps the bigger blow to the president’s political clout is the deplatforming from the major social media firms. When presidents leave office, they lose a huge megaphone to reach their supporters. Facebook and YouTube have crimped Mr. Trump’s outreach even more by suspending his accounts. Snapchat and Twitter did so permanently, the latter’s move a particular blow for the tweet-prone president.Social media allowed Mr. Trump to spread his unproven claims of a stolen election quickly and repeatedly. “You’re much more likely to believe a lie if it comes to you through your network of trust,” says Ms. Torres-Spelliscy. “Part of what explains the myth of voter fraud being believed by so many people is that it came through a network that they trusted, which was the president and his Twitter feed and his Facebook posts. ‘Deplatforming’ him takes away that vector for that lie.”The deplatforming is the most effective anti-Trump action that corporations have taken, but it may backfire, says Ray La Raja, a political science professor at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. “It’s a risk for these organizations to do that because it really calls attention to how much power they have.”The third front of corporate opposition is targeting his political supporters, especially the 147 members of Congress who last week objected to one or more certifications of President-elect Joe Biden’s election.More than 50 corporate political action committees, including those for Goldman Sachs, American Airlines, Blue Cross Blue Shield, and Dow, have temporarily suspended donations to either all members of Congress or the 147 objectors specifically. And other PACs are mulling similar actions. Hallmark’s PAC has asked objecting Sens. Josh Hawley and Roger Marshall for its donations back. Financial adviser Charles Schwab is dissolving its PAC altogether.As big as corporate PACs are, they’re less important than they used to be. For one thing, politicians increasingly rely on small donors, along with billionaires. In the most recent election cycle, the 147 GOP objectors raised in all some $68 million from corporate PACs – some 16% of their total fundraising, according to the Center for Responsive Politics (CRP), a Washington nonprofit that tracks campaign money. Some pro-Trump politicians are more reliant on PACs than others.Also, corporations can donate to so-called dark pools, which makes contributions hard to trace. For example, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America gave some $144,000 to GOP candidates in PAC money but $4.5 million to a GOP dark money group called American Action Network, the CRP reports.“We don’t know, for the most part, who the corporations are funding,” says Beth Allen, a spokeswoman for the Communications Workers of America, a union that is calling for comprehensive campaign finance reform. Backlash as a fundraising tool?For Trump politicians in red states, the corporate backlash could actually prove to be a valuable fundraising tool if they can position themselves as standing up to corporations rather than caving to them, says Professor Primo of the University of Rochester. “A lot is going to depend, of course, on whether these legislators are still considered viable for reelection in their district.”For the corporate actions to prove meaningful in the long term, they will have to stay in place for some time, campaign finance experts say. That includes the pause in PAC donations and the social media companies’ bans on Mr. Trump.But voters’ memories are short. Political fortunes can turn on a dime. In 2018, for example, several corporate PACs asked for their donations back after Republican Sen. Cindy Hyde-Smith of Mississippi made controversial comments about attending public hangings and curtailing Democratic votes. Despite the lack of corporate support, she won the special election. A year later, several major PACS, including Exxon Mobil and Genentech, were contributing to her campaign, and she won reelection in 2020. An ardent Trump supporter, she is one of the handful of senators who voted last week against certifying the election results of Arizona and Pennsylvania.The same uncertainty holds true for Mr. Trump’s political future.“How many times have we said, ‘Oh, this is it. ... He’s gone too far this time,’” Professor Primo says. “He’s come back time and again. So it would be a mistake to just think he’s going to go away into the night quietly.”

17 - US unemployment applications spike to highest since August
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2021/0114/US-unemployment-applications-spike-to-highest-since-August
The number of people seeking unemployment aid soared last week to 965,000, the most since late August, with evidence that the resurgent virus has caused a spike in layoffs.The latest figures for jobless claims, issued Thursday by the United States Labor Department, remain at levels never seen until the virus struck. Before the pandemic, weekly applications typically numbered around 225,000. Last spring, after nationwide shutdowns took effect, applications for jobless benefits spiked to nearly 7 million – 10 times the previous record high. After declining over the summer, weekly claims have been stuck above 700,000 since September.The high pace of layoffs coincides with an economy that has faltered as consumers have avoided traveling, shopping, and dining out in the face of soaring viral caseloads. More than 4,300 deaths were reported Tuesday, another record high. Shutdowns of restaurants, bars, and other venues where people gather in California, New York, and other states have likely forced up layoffs.Some states and cities are resisting shutdowns, partly out of fear of the economic consequences but raising the risk of further infections. Minnesota allowed in-person dining to resume this week. Michigan is poised to do the same. Some bars and restaurants in Kansas City are extending their hours.In addition to the first-time applications for unemployment aid last week, the government said Thursday that 5.3 million Americans are continuing to receive state jobless benefits, up from 5.1 million in the previous week.Many more Americans are receiving jobless aid from two federal programs – one that provides extended benefits to people who have exhausted their state aid and another that supplies benefits to self-employed and contract workers.Those two programs had expired near the end of December. They were belatedly renewed, through mid-March, in a $900 billion rescue aid package that Congress approved and President Donald Trump signed into law. That package also includes $600 relief checks for most adults and a supplemental unemployment benefit payment of $300 a week. Congressional Democrats favor boosting the checks to $2,000 and extending federal aid beyond March, as does President-elect Joe Biden.The U.S. job market’s weakness was made painfully clear in the December employment report that the government issued last week. Employers shed jobs for the first time since April as the pandemic tightened its grip on consumers and businesses.The figures also depicted a sharply uneven job market: The losses last month were concentrated among restaurants, bars, hotels, and entertainment venues – places that provide in-person services that some governments have restricted or that consumers are avoiding. Educational services, mostly colleges and universities, also cut workers in December. So did film and music studios.Most other large industries, though, reported job gains. Many economists had expected last spring that job losses would spread to more industries. Though all sectors of the economy initially laid off workers, most of them have avoided deep layoffs. Manufacturing, construction, and professional services like engineering and architecture, for example, all added jobs in December.At the same time, many companies seem reluctant to ramp up hiring. A government report Tuesday showed that employers advertised fewer open jobs in November than in October. The decline, while small, was widespread across most industries. Even now, the nation has nearly 10 million fewer jobs than it did before the pandemic sent the economy into a deep recession nearly a year ago, having recovered just 56% of the jobs lost in the spring.Many economists say that once coronavirus vaccines are more widely distributed, a broader recovery should take hold in the second half of the year. The incoming Biden administration, along with a now fully Democratic-led House and Senate, is also expected to push more rescue aid and spending measures that could accelerate growth.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

18 - How young people are responding to the COVID-19 economy
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2021/0113/How-young-people-are-responding-to-the-COVID-19-economy
Adesola Akerele had just landed an internship at a television production company in London when the coronavirus hit, and her dream job was gone.But as the pandemic halted studies and wiped out employment opportunities for millions of young people around the world, the recent graduate found a silver lining – using the lockdown to launch her career as an independent screenwriter.Ms. Akerele had always wanted to write about the experience of being Black in Britain, and as global anti-racism protests spread last year, she found people wanted to listen.“The pandemic gave me something I didn’t have before: time to write and develop my own ideas,” she told the Thomson Reuters Foundation.From teenagers coding in their bedrooms to graduates spurning scarce entry-level jobs to set up businesses, Ms. Akerele belongs to Generation COVID – young people who will have to innovate to enter the labor market in 2021 against tough odds.One in 6 young people have stopped working since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, and about half reported a delay in their studies, according to a survey by the United Nations’ International Labor Organization (ILO).Labor experts say it is too soon to know exactly how this will impact the generation’s lifelong career prospects, but that their path to work is unlikely to be conventional in 2021 and beyond.“Young people are being more entrepreneurial and looking at career and employment as well as education in a more non-traditional way,” said Susan Reichle, president and CEO of the International Youth Foundation, a United States-based nonprofit.“The traditional sort of first jobs in the service industry, in the hospitality industry are just not there.”Bhargav Joshi was hired at the start of the year as a commis chef at a high-end Italian restaurant in Mumbai. When he was laid off due to COVID-19, he took his skills into his parents’ kitchen and opened his own takeaway.“It’s been five months since I started. I have managed to break even and that is a big accomplishment for me,” Mr. Joshi said.The shift towards entrepreneurship and gig work was underway even before the pandemic among youth, who are three times as likely to be unemployed compared with people aged over 25, according to the ILO.With so many applicants chasing so few jobs, Ms. Akerele, the screenwriter, realized she could benefit more from pursuing independent projects and freelance work than sending off applications.In October, she signed with an agency to work on a TV show about the young Black British experience.Ms. Reichle said many young people lack the means to launch their own companies or pursue creative projects, but with more government support they could.Kimberly-Viola Heita thought 2020 would be the year she became a student radio presenter and formed a new political society at the University of Namibia.She was excited for her classes and debates with peers, but when the coronavirus forced the school to close many of her classmates went home to rural areas with minimal internet access. Online learning became a luxury.Instead of disconnecting, Ms. Heita took the political science society of nearly 100 students onto WhatsApp, and the messaging platform became a source of debate, motivation, and support, she said.“2020 has forced us to innovate, collaborate and discover resilience we didn’t know we had,” she said.As jobs and education moved online during the pandemic, digital skills became in more demand than ever – a trend which will likely continue, said Drew Gardiner, a youth employment specialist at the ILO.“Young people very much want to get the coding skills, the artificial intelligence skills, but also simpler stuff, like online work translating and editing,” he said.Training in such skills is not always readily available, but initiatives are springing up around the world to meet demand. Aisha Abubakar, in northern Nigeria, took part in Click-On Kaduna, a World Bank pilot project last year that trained young people in digital marketing, graphics and design, and ways to access remote online work.Ms. Abubakar is an interior designer but did not know how to find clients before the course, she said.Now her business is flourishing, and she has also set up an informal mentoring program via WhatsApp to help other women in her community digitize their small businesses.Out of 12,000 young people surveyed by the ILO, about half said they had become vulnerable to anxiety or depression since the start of the pandemic, with those who had lost their jobs the most affected.“The uncertainty that the situation has created about their futures is raising really big red flags for us,” said Nikita Sanaullah, senior policy officer on social and economic inclusion at the European Youth Forum.In many European countries, youth have a harder time accessing social services such as unemployment benefits because they have not banked enough work hours to do so, said Ms. Sanaullah. And as youth lose their incomes, they may also lose housing, she said.“This was a big challenge even before this crisis occurred,” she said, adding that despite their difficulties, young people were perhaps becoming more engaged in social activism.In San Francisco, James Poetzscher found an unusual way to help when he started making online maps of air pollution as a hobby.When wildfires engulfed California in August, he took his project one step further and built an air-quality data portal for government and nonprofit organizations to use – from his bedroom.He knows finding a job will be tough but plans to continue doing his research on air pollution and climate change.“Regardless of age, we can all make a difference,” he said.This story was reported by the Thomson Reuters Foundation.

19 - In US-Mexico border towns, pandemic hits businesses especially hard
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2021/0105/In-US-Mexico-border-towns-pandemic-hits-businesses-especially-hard
The deafening silence seems to wash over Isabel Navarro as she watches the empty aisles of the clothing and trinket store she’s owned for the past 11 years.It’s among dozens of businesses selling low-priced clothing, shoes, toys, perfumes, and a vast array of products that make up the once-bustling downtown of Nogales, Arizona.Ms. Navarro’s shop, Mis Divinas, sits just a block away from a pedestrian crossing connecting the small 20,000-population border town to its sprawling 200,000-population sister city of Nogales, Mexico. Every year, business owners like Ms. Navarro wait in anticipation for crowds of Mexican families and workers touting their aguinaldos, end-of-year bonuses, to flood over the border and through their doors.But as border closures from the beginning of the pandemic stretch on, the U.S. side feels more like a ghost town. The challenge persists into the new year, even while the harshest effects were felt in the just-finished holiday season.“This is when we make all of our money,” Ms. Navarro says in the days leading up to Christmas. “But this year, their aguinaldo isn’t going to be spent here. It’s going to stay in Mexico.”Peering out to an empty street, she adds, “It looks very sad.”The U.S., Mexico, and Canada imposed restrictions on land border crossings in March to stop the spread of the virus. Eight months later, land ports on the Mexico border are open for essential activities like work and medical appointments, and to U.S. citizens and green card holders.But regular foot traffic from Mexican shoppers vital to businesses on the U.S. side of the border has come to a near standstill. As those restrictions run until at least Jan. 21, economies across the 2,000-mile U.S.-Mexico border have crumbled.“Border economies are interdependent,” explains Irasema Coronado, director of the School of Transborder Studies at Arizona State University. “There are many businesses on the U.S. side of the border that rely and thrive on Mexican shoppers. ... Likewise, there are businesses in Mexico that rely on U.S. shoppers to come and buy.” Christopher Wilson, deputy director of the Wilson Center’s Mexico Institute, describes the extended closures as an “early stay-at-home order that never went away.”“It’s partially the closure of the border, but also a result of the COVID recession everyone is facing,” Mr. Wilson says. “These communities are getting a double dose of what communities across Mexico and the United States are facing.”Small-business owners like Ms. Navarro were left reeling. Ms. Navarro, born on the Mexican side of Nogales, once crossed with her family to do holiday shopping in stores like the one she currently runs. Now a permanent resident in the U.S., she opened Mis Divinas in downtown Nogales in 2009 and slowly built her business up to four locations.In the pandemic, she says she lost at least 90% of her customers. Other business owners and employees say the number is closer to 99%.Aisles of sparkle-studded jackets, hair baubles, bed sets, strollers, bows, and plastic toys lie dormant. Once, she explains, the place was so full she wouldn’t have been able to walk. Now they’re fortunate if 10 people a day come through.“I had four shops, I had to close two already. And if things don’t get better, I will have to close another,” she explains. “I feel sad, really sad. Because it was a lot of work to build it ... then everything began to collapse.”Before the pandemic, an estimated 350 million people would cross through ports along the U.S.-Mexico border by foot or vehicle every year. In April 2020, the first full month of closures, crossings by foot, car, and bus in Nogales fell to just a fifth of what they were in April 2019, data from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics shows.The impact has been felt up and down the border in other sister cities like El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juárez in the Mexican state of Chihuahua; and San Diego, California, and Tijuana in the Mexican state of Baja California.One report by the Baker Institute for Public Policy concluded that counties along the Texas-Mexico border had lost nearly $4.9 billion in economic activity between March and November 2020 due to COVID-19 border closures. The retail sector in those regions has lost approximately $2 billion in eight months, and local governments have lost around $242.6 million in sales tax revenue alone, according to the report.Dr. Coronado grew up on the Arizona side of Nogales and says she remembers watching her mother write a shopping list for Nogales, Arizona, and Nogales in the Mexican state of Sonora every week. “A good binational shopper knows, ‘I can buy this in the U.S., I can buy that in Mexico, and I live better by using both economies,’” she says. Both sides of the border survive off one another, she says, and when they’re cut off, both sides wither. She worries that such economies may never fully recover.Peter Han, the owner of a sportswear shop down the street from Ms. Navarro, wonders the same.Perched behind his register, he leans back in his chair with a checkered fedora on his head. He’s owned the store for 30 years, but says he left his shop closed throughout the pandemic. He has opened the week before Christmas with an inkling of hope that there might be business.“I’m checking to see how many people come. Maybe next year I’ll close. I’ve been thinking about it a lot. That’s why I came in,” he explains.But Mr. Han has long stopped peering toward the entrance. Instead, he rather lazily watches Korean singing shows from an old TV set tucked in the corner. The muffled songs are the only sound coming from the shop.Outside, handwritten signs dot empty display windows of nearby stores. They read, “local en renta,” or “spot for rent,” and “A todos nuestros clientes, se les comunica que permanecerá cerrado hasta nuevo aviso,” or “To all of our customers, this is an advisory that the store will remain closed until further notice.” Padlocked and chained doors stretch down the street, and a few stray shoppers wander between the handful of stores that still remain open.“No one has come in. Yesterday, only three people came in. Yesterday, I only earned $10,” Mr. Han says, laughing. “Today, it’s nothing.”Editor’s note: As a public service, we have removed our paywall for all pandemic-related stories.

20 - Why US stock markets closed out 2020 at record highs
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2020/1231/Why-US-stock-markets-closed-out-2020-at-record-highs
Wall Street closed out a tumultuous year for stocks with more record highs Thursday, a fitting coda to the market’s stunning comeback from its historic plunge in the early weeks of the coronavirus pandemic.The benchmark S&P 500 index finished with a gain of 16.3% for the year, or a total return of about 18%, including dividends. The Nasdaq composite, powered by high-flying Big Tech stocks, soared 43.6%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 7.2%, with Apple and Microsoft leading the way.The market’s milestone-setting finish follows a mostly upward grind for stocks in recent weeks, fueled by cautious optimism that the U.S. economy and corporate profits will bounce back in 2021 now that the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines is under way.“We came into the year expecting slow growth and it turned out to be the fastest bear market recovery in history,” said Sunitha Thomas, national portfolio advisor at Northern Trust Wealth Management.The virus pandemic shocked markets early in the year. The S&P 500 fell 8.4% in February, then plunged 12.5% in March as the pandemic essentially froze the global economy. Businesses shut down in the face of the virus threat and tighter government restrictions. People shifted to working, shopping and doing pretty much everything else from home.The dire economic situation weighed heavily on almost any company that relied on direct consumer spending or a physical presence, including airlines, restaurants, hotels and mall-based retailers.Trading became volatile, especially in the early weeks of the pandemic, as investors scrambled amid an increasingly grim economic outlook. The Dow had several day-to-day swings of about 2,000 points. And the S&P 500 rose or fell by at least 1% on twice as many days in 2020 than it did, on average, since 1950.The VIX, which measures how much volatility investors expect from the S&P 500, climbed to a record high 82.69 in March and remained above its historical average for much of the year.The wave of selling accelerated as the economic fallout from the pandemic widened, leaving many long-term investors looking on as their gains after a blockbuster 2019 for stocks evaporated. Five months later, the market recouped all of its losses.“It was probably very hard to imagine getting those back in such a short period fo time,” said Shawn Cruz, senior market strategist at TD Ameritrade.Wall Street didn’t stay down for long, thanks in large part to unprecedented actions from the Federal Reserve and Congress to support the economy. Investors flocked to big technology companies such as Apple and Amazon and smaller companies like Grubhub and Etsy that were poised to take advantage of the shift to working and shopping from home.On Dec. 30, Apple's stock market value totaled $2.29 trillion, up 133% since March 23. Meanwhile, Congress recently approved nearly $300 billion in additional relief for small businesses, money that many hard-hit owners only hope can help them survive until the pandemic finally easesThe success of Apple and other big technology companies and the struggles of the smallest of businesses is just one example of how the pandemic created winners and losers in the business world in 2020. Wall Street recovered after March; Main Street is still struggling.The S&P 500 jumped 12.7% in April. From there, markets disconnected from the rest of the still-reeling economy and pushed higher in fits and starts as vaccine development progressed and analysts and economists looked ahead to the eventual end of the pandemic.Individual investors, sometimes referred to as retail investors on Wall Street, hopped onto the market rally via commission-free online trading platforms like Robinhood. Along the way, they helped power shares in companies like Tesla to new heights. The electric car maker jumped 743.4% in 2020 for the biggest gain in the S&P 500.“Retail investors represented a larger portion of the market than they ever have,” Cruz said. “It was retail and institutional investors all coming to the same conclusion about what was going to work and what wasn’t going to work this year at the same time.”The market’s turnaround was faster than anyone might have expected in March, when the S&P 500′s nearly 11-year bull-market run ended. By August, the index had recovered all of its losses and climbed to new highs. All told, the S&P 500 set 33 record highs in 2020.“It was another reminder that unless you have a foolproof market timing technique the adage to remember is it’s always better buy than bail,” said Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA.The end of the virus and its pummeling of the economy seems even closer now that vaccine approval and distribution is ramping up. The U.S. and U.K. have both approved Pfizer’s COVID-19 vaccine and Britain recently approved another vaccine from AstraZeneca and Oxford University. Meanwhile, the U.S. government has approved another round of aid for businesses and people dealing with another surge in the virus and tighter restrictions on businesses.Thomas expects pent-up demand and high savings rates to help drive an economic recovery in 2021. Many of the more beaten-down stocks will benefit from a “vaccine-shaped” recovery as the number of vaccines on the market increases and distribution widens.“We have more visibility that by midyear we start to be able to reopen the economy,” she said.The sharp run-up in stock prices relative to the outlook for earnings growth suggests stocks could be in for a correction, or drop of at least 10%, in 2021, Stovall said.“There’s a good possibility that we get a deep pullback — pullbacks being 5%-10% — or maybe a shallow correction,” he said. “Enough to remind investors that share prices don’t go up forever.”Markets were mostly quiet on the final day of trading for the year. Several overseas markets were closed for holidays, and U.S. markets will be closed for New Years Day on Friday.The S&P 500 rose 24.03 points, or 0.6%, to 3,756.07, an all-time high. The Dow rose 196.92 points, or 0.7%, to 30,606.48, a record high. The Nasdaq rose 18.28 points, or 0.1%, to 12,888.28.The Russell 2000 index of smaller companies fell 5.14 points, or 0.3%, to 1,974.86. Smaller companies notched strong gains in recent weeks after lagging in the early months of the broader market rebound. The Russell 2000 ended the year with a gain of 18.4%.Trading was closed in Tokyo and South Korea as well as Germany. France’s CAC 40 slipped 0.9% and Britain’s FTSE 100 lost 1.5%.The yield on the 10-year Treasury note rose to 0.92% from 0.91% late Wednesday.

21 - Amid many losses in 2020, a win for electric cars
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2021/0112/Amid-many-losses-in-2020-a-win-for-electric-cars
Europe’s push into electric cars is gathering speed – despite the pandemic.Automaker Volkswagen tripled sales of battery-only cars in 2020 as its new electric compact ID.3 came on the market ahead of tough new European Union limits on auto emissions. And Germany, long a laggard in adopting electric vehicles, saw more people buy electrics in December than opted for previously dominant diesel vehicles.Those are early signs of what will likely be an upcoming year of increasing market share for electric cars as EU regulations drive their adoption, despite the recession caused by the coronavirus pandemic that has caused the overall car market to shrink.Volkswagen said Tuesday its namesake brand sold 134,000 battery-powered cars last year, up from 45,000 in 2019.Including hybrids, which combine an internal combustion engine and an electric motor, sales of electrified cars reached 212,000, up from 82,000 in 2019.Volkswagen’s announcement comes as the auto industry association in Germany reports that one in four cars sold in the country in December had an electric motor, uptake that was supported by incentives as part of the government stimulus package during the COVID-19 recession.Battery and hybrid cars took 26.6% of sales that month, running ahead of diesel cars, which had 26.2%. That is also a token of diesel’s steep decline after Volkswagen’s 2015 scandal involving diesel cars rigged to cheat on emissions tests.Electric cars have so far been a small but rapidly growing slice of the European market. According to the European Automobile Manufacturers Association, in the July-September quarter of 2020 9.9% of cars sold were chargeable vehicles, up from 3.0% a year earlier. The association publishes full-year statistics on Feb. 4.Automakers in the EU must sell more zero-emission cars in order to meet tougher fleet average limits on emissions of carbon dioxide, the primary greenhouse gas blamed for climate change. Those limits came fully into effect on Jan. 1. Failure to achieve a fleet average of less than 95 grams of carbon dioxide per kilometer driven can mean heavy fines.Sales have been driven by government incentives, and by an increasing number of new models that – like the ID.3 – were designed purely as electric cars, rather than being converted from internal combustion models. Electric-only design can mean more interior space as a selling point. The compact ID.3 isn’t coming to the United States market, where Volkswagen will offer the electric ID.4 sport-utility vehicle made on the same mechanical base.Demand has been held back by lack of places to charge electric cars, including for people who live in apartment buildings and can’t install a charging box at home. Germany’s auto association, the VDA, said there’s only one publicly available charging station for every 17 electric cars.California-based Tesla has been a major factor in the electric upswing with its Model 3 and its proprietary network of fast-charging stations.The government in China, the world’s largest auto market, is also pressing carmakers to lower emissions.The uptake of electric vehicles has been slower in the U.S., where regulatory pressure has been weaker and where gasoline costs as little as $2 per gallon, depending on the region. That compares to 1.30 euros per liter of gas, or $6 per gallon in Germany, much of which can be attributed to taxation.This story was reported by Associated Press. 

22 - How 60,000 discarded flip-flops ended up on a remote island
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2021/0107/How-60-000-discarded-flip-flops-ended-up-on-a-remote-island
In different parts of the world, environmental catastrophes happen in different ways. In Australia and California last year, it was a series of ferocious wildfires. In Venezuela and Mauritius, there were massive oil spills. In the Horn of Africa, locusts. And at the remote Aldabra atoll in Seychelles, disaster is unfolding in the form of abandoned fishing gear and 60,000 discarded flip-flops.That footwear composed about a quarter of the nearly 28 tons of plastic debris collected over five weeks in 2019 by the Aldabra Clean Up Project (ACUP), a team of 12 volunteers from Seychelles and Oxford University. The project’s aim was to put a number to the atoll’s marine plastic pollution problem and to calculate the cost of cleaning it up. In a paper published in Scientific Reports in September 2020, the team estimated that they had collected about 5% of the total amount of litter that had washed up on the atoll.Thanks to a convergence of ocean currents, some of the most remote islands on Earth – small island countries like Seychelles and Maldives in the Indian Ocean as well as islands in the Atlantic, Pacific, and Caribbean – are bearing the brunt of the world’s marine plastic pollution.The problem is getting worse: A study published in July 2020 by the Pew Charitable Trusts found that, if current trends continue, plastic flows into the ocean are expected to nearly triple by 2040, reaching 32 million tons – the equivalent of about 35 pounds for every foot of the world’s coastlines. And in December, the marine conservation organization Oceans Asia reported that an estimated 1.56 billion face masks likely ended up in the oceans in 2020.The good news is that immediate action could stem that flow by 80%, according to the Pew study. Many countries – with the notable exception of the United States – say they are prepared to do just that. At a virtual meeting in November, two-thirds of United Nations member states declared that they are open to a global treaty aimed at reducing plastic waste. As with all environmental initiatives, the first step requires measuring the extent of the problem, which means more local projects like the ACUP.“Regional solutions that provide economies of scale, supported by international expertise and financing, will be the only way our natural heritage and landfills will not receive waste from other countries,” says Jeremy Raguain, communications and outreach coordinator at the Seychelles Islands Foundation and one of the authors of the Scientific Reports paper.An uninhabited oasis for turtles … and trashThe Aldabra atoll, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, lies more than 700 miles from Seychelles’ main island of Mahé. The nearest human settlement is 400 miles away, on the African coast. This coral atoll, one of the world’s largest, is home to the only wild population of the Aldabra giant tortoise, and is a crucial nesting site for the vulnerable green turtle. Despite being uninhabited and strictly protected by the Seychelles Islands Foundation, the islands of the remote Aldabra atoll are said to have more plastic trash per square foot than any other island on Earth. The debris, carried by ocean currents, has not only harmed wildlife – preventing turtles from nesting, choking birds who have ingested the plastic, entangling marine creatures – but also damaged entire ecosystems.“We do not yet know the full impact of plastic accumulation on Aldabra,” says April Burt, a Ph.D. student at Oxford’s Department of Plant Sciences and the Scientific Reports paper’s lead author. She notes that corals are more likely to become stressed when plastic is present in the water.“This could have an even more devastating impact on coral reefs in the region, which are already affected by several other threats,” she says.A price tag “beyond our capacity”Most of the plastic litter on Aldabra is a result of Seychelles’ tuna-fishing industry, an important source of foreign income for the island nation. Of the more than 550 tons of litter that the team estimated remains on the atoll, 83% is discarded fishing gear, such as buoys, nets, and rope, says Ms. Burt. “The tuna industry is polluting with impunity the very ecosystems it needs to sustain and at huge cost to the regional communities who rely on these ecosystems,” she says. “The industry is not paying for the damage they have done.”The ACUP team calculated that clearing Aldabra of 95% of the litter remaining on the atoll would require a staggering $4.68 million – a price that Seychelles simply can’t afford.Another major challenge faced by such nations is the lack of specialized recycling technology. In Seychelles, only PET plastic, glass, paper, and aluminum can be commercially recycled, says Mr. Raguain.“The variety of pollution ending up on Aldabra’s shores, as well as its state of degradation, is beyond our capacity to manage,” he says. “In the long term, the cost of removing plastic from protected areas like Aldabra will fall upon already-strained conservation resources and SIDS [small island developing states] taxpayers,” says Rolph Payet, former Seychelles minister for environment, currently serving as the executive secretary for the secretariat of the Basel, Rotterdam, and Stockholm conventions. “Seychelles and other SIDS should continue to strongly advocate for concrete and measurable action against the major polluters.”As there is no cost data from any other island cleanups, the calculations from the ACUP are also meant to help Seychelles and other SIDS in planning their marine litter cleanups, which in turn would help them in requesting funding and assistance from the international community. While the extent of plastic pollution on Aldabra is alarming, Brendan Godley, professor of conservation science at the University of Exeter, remains hopeful. “Plastic pollution is an avoidable problem, and there is a tangible link between our actions and their consequences,” he says. “We can all be part of the solution.”

23 - As mountains give way to border wall, where does wildlife go?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2020/1218/As-mountains-give-way-to-border-wall-where-does-wildlife-go
Work crews ignite dynamite blasts in the remote and rugged southeast corner of Arizona, forever reshaping the landscape as they pulverize mountaintops in a rush to build more of President Donald Trump’s border wall before his term ends next month.Each blast in Guadalupe Canyon releases puffs of dust as workers level land to make way for 30-foot-tall steel columns near the New Mexico line. Heavy machines crawl over roads gouged into rocky slopes while one tap-tap-taps open holes for posts on the United States Bureau of Land Management property.Mr. Trump has expedited border wall construction in his last year, mostly in wildlife refuges and Indigenous territory the government owns in Arizona and New Mexico, avoiding the legal fights over private land in busier crossing areas of Texas. The work has caused environmental damage, preventing animals from moving freely and scarring unique mountain and desert landscapes that conservationists fear could be irreversible. The administration says it’s protecting national security, citing that to waive environmental laws in its drive to fulfill a signature immigration policy.Environmentalists hope President-elect Joe Biden will stop the work, but that could be difficult and expensive to do quickly and may still leave pillars towering over sensitive borderlands.The worst damage is along Arizona’s border, from century-old saguaro cactuses toppled in the western desert to shrinking ponds of endangered fish in eastern canyons. Recent construction has sealed off what was the Southwest’s last major undammed river. It’s more difficult for desert tortoises, the occasional ocelot, and the world’s tiniest owls to cross the boundary.“Interconnected landscapes that stretch across two countries are being converted into industrial wastelands,” said Randy Serraglio of the Center for Biological Diversity in Tucson.In the San Bernardino National Wildlife Refuge near Guadalupe Canyon, biologist Myles Traphagen said field cameras have captured 90% less movement by animals like mountain lions, bobcats, and pig-like javelinas over the past three months.“This wall is the largest impediment to wildlife movement we’ve ever seen in this part of the world,” said Mr. Traphagen of the nonprofit Wildlands Network. “It’s altering the evolutionary history of North America.”The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in 1982 established the nearly 4-square-mile refuge to protect water resources and endangered native fish. Diverse hummingbirds, bees, butterflies, and bats also live there.Since contractors for U.S. Customs and Border Protection began building a new stretch of wall there in October, environmentalists estimate that millions of gallons of groundwater have been pumped to mix cement and spray down dusty dirt roads.Solar power now pumps water into a shrinking pond underneath rustling cottonwood trees. Bullfrogs croak and Yaqui topminnows wiggle through the pool once fed solely by natural artesian wells pulling ancient water from an aquifer.A 3-mile barrier has sealed off a migratory corridor for wildlife between Mexico’s Sierra Madre and the Rocky Mountains to the north, threatening species like the endangered Chiricahua leopard frog and blue-gray aplomado falcon.The Trump administration says it’s completed 430 miles of the $15 billion wall and promises to reach 450 miles by year’s end.Biden transition officials say he stands by his campaign promise – “not another foot” of wall. It’s unclear how Mr. Biden would stop construction, but it could leave projects half-finished, force the government to pay to break contracts, and anger those who consider the wall essential to border security.“Building a wall will do little to deter criminals and cartels seeking to exploit our borders,” Mr. Biden’s transition team has said. It says Mr. Biden will focus on “smart border enforcement efforts, like investments in improving screening infrastructure at our ports of entry, that will actually keep America safer.”Environmentalists hope for an ally in Alejandro Mayorkas, Mr. Biden’s nominee to lead the Department of Homeland Security, which oversees Customs and Border Protection.Until construction is stopped, “every day, it will be another another mile of borderlands being trashed,” Mr. Serraglio said.Environmental law attorney Dinah Bear said Mr. Biden’s administration could terminate building contracts, which would allow companies to seek settlements. What that would cost isn’t clear because the contracts aren’t public, but Ms. Bear said it would pale in comparison to the price of finishing and maintaining the wall. Military funds reappropriated under a national emergency declared by Mr. Trump are now funding the work.Ms. Bear, who worked at the White House’s Council on Environmental Quality under Republican and Democratic administrations, said she wants to see Congress set aside money to repair damage by removing the wall in critical areas, buying more habitat, and replanting slopes.Ecologists say damage could be reversed in Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, where thousands of tree-like saguaros were bulldozed, with some reportedly replanted elsewhere.They say keeping floodgates open could help ease damage done by damming the San Pedro River, which runs north from just below the Mexican border through the central corridor of the Sierra Madre’s “Sky Islands.”These high mountains have ecosystems dramatically different from the desert below, with 300 bird species, including the yellow-billed cuckoo, nesting along what was the Southwest’s last major free-flowing river. The white-nosed, racoon-like coati, and the yellow-striped Sonoran tiger salamander also live there.In the nearby Coronado National Monument, scientists are using cameras to document wildlife as crews prepare to start building.Switchbacks have been slashed into mountainsides, but 30-foot posts aren’t yet up along the area where a Spanish expedition marched through around 1540.The government plans to install the towering pillars 4 inches apart where there are now vehicle barriers a couple of feet high with openings large enough to allow large cats and other animals to cross to mate and hunt.Biologist Emily Burns of the nonprofit Sky Island Alliance said construction will hurt elf owls, the world’s littlest at less than 5 inches tall. The birds are too small to fly over the fence and likely wouldn’t know to squeeze through.“This kind of large-scale disruption can push a species to the brink, even if they aren’t threatened,” said Louise Misztal, the nonprofit's executive director.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

24 - Electric cars are on the rise in cities. Can power grids cope?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2020/1216/Electric-cars-are-on-the-rise-in-cities.-Can-power-grids-cope
A stroll down Stockholm’s longest street that takes its name from the mythical Valhalla, where Norse gods feast and fight until doomsday, gives a hint of the battle today’s power grids face to keep pace with government goals to electrify transport.Early this month, a man selling Christmas trees looked on as workers installed 10 public vehicle charging stations with two power outlets each in Valhallavägen, which is around 2.17 miles long.It’s progress, but not enough.Sales of electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles during the first nine months of 2020 rose by 122% in the European Union, accounting for about 8% of new car sales, industry figures show.In Sweden, electric vehicles (EVs) made up nearly 28% of the market for the first three quarters of the year, with 56,559 fully-electric or plug-in hybrids sold.Sales of petrol and diesel cars will be banned in Sweden from 2030, so many more of the nearly 5 million passenger cars registered today will gradually be replaced by zero-emission EVs.Kristofer Fröjd, head of business development at Ellevio, Stockholm’s power distributor, said Stockholm has fewer than 4,000 public charging stations and will require 25,000 by 2030.Apart from the quantity, there are other issues as Sweden’s power grid is already stretched to capacity at times, especially during the peak demand winter months.On the coldest days, operators will have to balance the demand for domestic heat – and Christmas tree lights – with transport needs, which means that within two or three years, as EV numbers climb, drivers will have to put up with slower charging at public stations.“The grid in Sweden is robust, but it’s very, very old,” Mr. Fröjd said. “We can’t jeopardize the health of our grid.”National transmission grid operator Svenska Kraftnät plans to spend up to 150 billion Swedish krona ($17.9 billion) rebuilding about 3,107 miles, or roughly a third, of Sweden’s grid, by 2030.Officials say that will not be soon enough to prevent capacity coming under strain from around 2022.Environmental group Transport & Environment (T&E) says it is not inevitable that EVs create grid problems.In a report in June last year, it said using old vehicle batteries for energy storage would boost capacity and that charging overnight and during off-peak hours would spread out demand.But significant investment is still necessary.The European Union as a whole, will require 2.9 million public chargers for up to 44 million EVs by 2030, up from 200,000 chargers at the end of 2019, at a cost of 20 billion euros ($24.30 billion), T&E estimates. A further 60 billion euros will be needed for private chargers at home.Private investors could help. But Hannes Weckmann, a director at consultancy AlixPartners, said they are cautious because charging station use is so low for now.Simon Webber, a portfolio manager at Schroders, which has about $650 billion in assets under management, said he is “a little bit wary” of investing because so many players, from utilities to supermarket chains, have public charging projects, the risk is they will not all be profitable.“It’s a bit unclear to me what the success of the business models will be,” Mr. Webber said.East-West divide?Some auto industry executives worry investment in charging will be concentrated in richer, Western member states and the difficulty of finding public charging stations in Eastern European countries will depress demand.For automakers, that would mean having to sell more electric cars in affluent markets to meet EU-wide carbon reduction targets.“If there’s no charging infrastructure, they’re not going to sell the cars,” said Mattias Bergman, CEO of Swedish auto industry group BIL Sweden.Sweden has begun preparing for soaring electricity consumption, expected as data centers, heavy industry, and a rising population, as well as greater EV use, increase demand by an estimated 43% by 2045 from now.That is equivalent to one and a half times Denmark’s power use, Ellevio’s Mr. Fröjd says.By 2045, EVs will consume nearly 10% of Sweden’s total electric power output, up from 0.4% now, Per Eckemark, Svenska Kraftnät’s grid executive manager said.Sweden’s challenges are echoed elsewhere in the EU and beyond.A study published by Britain’s car lobby group in September estimated Britain alone will need 2.8 million public chargers by 2035, at a cost of 16.7 billion pounds ($22.07 billion) versus less than 20,000 today.Jacob Briggs, a senior analyst at energy consultant Cornwall Insight, says the cost of connecting charging station depends on the capacity of the grid behind it.“In one region you could be charged 30,000 pounds for the connection and all the capacity you need for that site, or 300,000 pounds or 3 million elsewhere,” Mr. Briggs said.That could lead to a very uneven distribution of charging points.Back in Stockholm, Eva Sunnerstedt, who runs Stockholm’s EV policy, said the city is working to streamline the planning process and the optimum places for chargers, but there is an element of guesswork.“We don’t know how driver behavior is going to evolve, so right now we’re testing this,” she said.This story was reported by Reuters.

25 - Can the world outdo the Paris accord? Climate summit dreams big.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2020/1214/Can-the-world-outdo-the-Paris-accord-Climate-summit-dreams-big
For many, it was a moment of unity and hope. Representatives from nations around the world had gathered in Paris in December 2015 and agreed to take drastic measures to curb climate change. But lurking behind the Paris Agreement was the understanding that those ambitious plans would not actually achieve the agreed-upon international goal of limiting global warming to an increase of 1.5 degrees Celsius, says Alden Meyer, a senior associate with E3G, a European climate change think tank.There was an “ambition gap,” he says, so the parties agreed to reconvene and update their goals every five years. On Saturday, the Paris Agreement’s fifth anniversary, participating global leaders gathered once again – this time virtually – to reaffirm their commitment to the accord and to put forth even bolder plans.“It’s all about putting some more meat on the bone,” says Rachel Cleetus, policy director with the climate and energy program at the Union of Concerned Scientists. It’s about “the countries not just making aspirational pledges, but backing them up with credible, ambitious policy plans domestically to make sure that they can meet their international commitments.”“An important step forward”The Climate Ambition Summit 2020 indeed delivered more tangible plans to reach lofty goals from many international leaders. But, experts say, there is still work to be done.“The summit has now sent strong signals that more countries and more businesses are ready to take the bold climate action on which our future security and prosperity depend,” United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres said on Saturday. “Today was an important step forward, but it’s not yet enough. Let’s not forget that we are still on track to an increase of temperature of 3 degrees at least in the end of the century, which would be catastrophic.”For Saturday’s summit, 71 countries submitted more ambitious national climate plans. Many included significantly more aggressive goals than were outlined in Paris, and 45 focused on benchmarks for 2030. The European Union, for example, has now set higher goals than the ones it agreed to in Paris, promising to reduce net carbon emissions 55% from 1990 levels by 2030, a target that Mr. Meyer calls “a significant step up in ambition.”Several countries pledged to go net-zero by the middle of the century – or sooner, in many cases. Perhaps most notably, Group of 20 countries like China, Japan, South Korea, the EU, and Argentina have joined that group.When science meets politicsSince the Paris accord, some countries have taken strides in reducing their emissions. India, for example, has gone from being a growing source of global emissions to being on track to meet international plans to limit warming to 2 degrees Celsius, according to the Climate Action Tracker. The countries that have made notable progress tend to be smaller ones with minimal carbon emissions to start with.But global carbon emissions have continued to rise, and most of the progress made in the last half a decade is hard to measure. There has been a move away from coal in much of the West, coinciding with falling costs of renewables, says Dr. Cleetus, making those energy sources competitive with fossil fuels in many parts of the world. “We know how to do 80% of emissions reduction,” says Katharine Mach, associate professor at the University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and a lead author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report and the U.S. Fourth National Climate Assessment.“Technologically we know how to do it, economically, it’s the right choice, the lower cost option,” in more and more places, she says. “That we can get most of the way there, to the super aggressive targets, based on the technologies that exist now, for me, is always very hopeful.”But this knowledge, she says, isn’t necessarily easy to translate into climate action. There’s politics to contend with. “Climate models usually have been just physics of how the science works, or in the solutions model space, it’s just straight economics,” she says. “In between the two is how societies actually work.”A fickle friendTo Michael Mann, professor of atmospheric science at Pennsylvania State University and a lead author on the Observed Climate Variability and Change chapter of the IPCC Third Scientific Assessment Report, “ambition is a close cousin of optimism and hope.”“Every bit of additional warming does damage, so we can never truly be too ambitious,” he writes in an email. “But we must also recognize the political constraints we’re operating under and work to achieve progress that is possible under those constraints.”A big concern for Paris Agreement participants and climate change activists is the absence of action from some of the biggest emitters, like Australia and the United States. The U.S. emerged as a leader in climate pledges five years ago, but with the nation pulling out of the agreement under President Donald Trump, that changed sharply. Now, President-elect Joe Biden, who made climate change a central part of his campaign, has said he plans to rejoin the Paris Agreement. But much of the world is waiting to see what can actually be achieved when he takes office in January.“The world is painfully aware of the yo-yo nature of American politics” and the partisan split, says Mr. Meyer. “The question people overseas have is, what can the U.S. deliver, given the political tensions?”

26 - Over 40 US states and FTC sue Facebook for antitrust conduct
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1210/Over-40-US-states-and-FTC-sue-Facebook-for-antitrust-conduct
The giant tech companies whose services are woven into the fabric of social life are now the targets of a widening assault by government competition enforcers. Regulators filed landmark antitrust lawsuits Wednesday against Facebook, the second major government offensive this year against once seemingly untouchable tech behemoths.The Federal Trade Commission and 48 states and districts sued the social network giant, accusing it of abusing its market power to squash smaller competitors and seeking remedies that could include a forced spinoff of Facebook’s prized Instagram and WhatsApp messaging services. The company’s conduct has crimped consumers’ choices and harmed their data privacy, the regulators charged.Once lionized as innovators and job creators – and largely left alone by Washington for nearly two decades – Big Tech companies have seen their political fortunes plummet. Facebook, Google, Amazon, and Apple have come under scrutiny from Congress, federal regulators, state attorneys general, and European authorities. Their once-considerable political support in Congress has eroded.Lawmakers of both major parties are championing stronger oversight of the industry, arguing that its massive market power is out of control, crushing smaller competitors and endangering consumer privacy.There’s little likelihood the pressure will ease up. President-elect Joe Biden has said the breakup of Big Tech giants should be seriously considered.Lawmakers and consumer advocates have accused Facebook of anticompetitive behavior, most starkly in buying up aspiring smaller rivals like Instagram and WhatsApp and by copying features introduced by competitors. Critics say such tactics squash competition and could limit viable alternatives for consumers looking, for instance, for comparable services that do less tracking for targeted advertising. Businesses, including mom and pop shops, might have to pay more for ads if they have fewer choices to reach consumers online.The new lawsuits were announced by the FTC and New York Attorney General Letitia James, culminating separate investigations over the past year and a half.The FTC said Facebook has engaged in a “a systematic strategy” to eliminate its competition, including by purchasing smaller up-and-coming rivals like Instagram in 2012 and WhatsApp in 2014.At a news conference, Ms. James said “it’s really critically important that we block this predatory acquisition of companies and that we restore confidence to the market.”“For nearly a decade Facebook has used its dominance and monopoly power to crush smaller rivals and snuff out competition, all at the expense of everyday users,” said Ms. James, a Democrat. “They reduced choices for consumers. They stifled innovation, and they degraded privacy protections for millions of Americans.”Facebook called the government’s claims “revisionist history” that punishes successful businesses and noted that the FTC cleared the Instagram and WhatsApp acquisitions years ago. “The government now wants a do-over, sending a chilling warning to American business that no sale is ever final,” Facebook general counsel Jennifer Newstead said in a statement.Antitrust skeptics point to newer social media services such as TikTok and Snapchat as rivals that could “overtake” older platforms like Facebook.Facebook is the world’s biggest social network with 2.7 billion users and a company with a market value of nearly $800 billion. CEO Mark Zuckerberg is the world’s fifth-richest individual and the most public face of Big Tech swagger.Ms. James alleged that Facebook had a practice of opening its site to third-party app developers, then abruptly cutting off developers that it saw as a threat. The lawsuit – which includes 46 states, Guam, and the District of Columbia – accuses Facebook of anti-competitive conduct and using its market dominance to harvest consumer data and reap a fortune in advertising revenues.Online ads make up the bulk of the company’s revenue, which reached over $70 billion last year.North Carolina Attorney General Josh Stein, who was on the executive committee of attorneys general conducting the investigation, said the litigation could alter the communications landscape much the way the breakup of AT&T’s local phone service monopoly did in the early 1980s.“Our hope is to restructure the social networking marketplace in the United States, and right now there’s one player,” Mr. Stein told reporters.Antitrust expert Rebecca Allensworth, a law professor at Vanderbilt University, said it is “hard to win any antitrust lawsuit and this one is not any different.” But as far as antitrust cases go, she added, the government has a strong one.“These lawsuits mark an important turning point in the battle to rein in Big Tech monopolies and to reinvigorate antitrust enforcement,” said Alex Harman, competition policy advocate for Public Citizen, a nonprofit consumer advocacy group.The Justice Department sued Google in October for abusing its dominance in online search and advertising – the government’s most significant attempt to buttress competition since its historic case against Microsoft two decades ago.That suit, announced just two weeks before Election Day, brought accusations of political motivation from some quarters. It was filed by a cabinet agency headed by an attorney general seen as a close ally of President Donald Trump, who has often publicly criticized Google.The FTC, by contrast, is an independent regulatory agency whose five commissioners currently include three Republicans and two Democrats. Two of the three Republicans, Noah Phillips and Christine Wilson, voted against the agency’s action against Facebook. And the coalition of 48 states and districts that sued Facebook is bipartisan.Instagram and WhatsApp are among some 70 companies that Facebook has acquired over the past 15 years. But they are the ones most frequently held up by Facebook critics as properties that should be split off.Facebook paid a mere $1 billion for Instagram – considered one of the cleverest deals ever in the industry – bolstering the social network’s business a month before its stock went public. At the time, the photo-sharing app had about 30 million users and wasn’t producing any revenue. A few years later, Facebook acquired WhatsApp, an encrypted messaging service, for $19 billion.Mr. Zuckerberg vowed both companies would be run independently, but over the years the services have become increasingly integrated. Users are now able to link accounts and share content across the platforms. Instagram now has more than 1 billion users worldwide. Such integration could make it more difficult to break off the companies.This story was reported by The Associated Press. AP journalists Barbara Ortutay in Oakland, California, and Gary D. Robertson in Raleigh, North Carolina, contributed to this report.

27 - EU privacy reform could impede efforts to combat child abuse
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1201/EU-privacy-reform-could-impede-efforts-to-combat-child-abuse
Online child sexual abuse could become harder to detect due to privacy protections set to take effect in the European Union next month – putting millions of children at increased risk worldwide, critics of the proposals have warned.Under the changes, big tech firms like Facebook and Microsoft would be banned from using automatic detection tools that are routinely employed to identify material containing images of child abuse, or to detect online grooming.Opponents of the tools say such automatic scanning infringes the privacy of people using chat and messaging apps, but the looming ban has drawn strong criticism around the world – from children’s rights advocates to American actor and tech investor Ashton Kutcher.“Time is running out to ensure proactive and voluntary online child abuse detection methods are preserved in the EU,” Mr. Kutcher wrote on Twitter earlier this month as European lawmakers (MEPs) prepare to vote on the new directive.Critics say the reform, set to come into force on Dec. 20, would prevent law enforcement and child protection agencies from identifying millions of child sexual abuse cases each year – not just in the 27-member state EU, but globally.“Online child sexual abuse is a borderless crime,” Chloe Setter, head of policy at WePROTECT Global Alliance – a nonprofit that fights child exploitation, told the Thomson Reuters Foundation.“Europe is already host to the vast majority of known child sexual abuse material on the internet, but victims and perpetrators can be anywhere. The restriction of automated detection tools in Europe would have major implications for children globally,” she said.Sex offenders in European countries use social media platforms to contact children around the world with the aim of grooming them, said Dorothea Czarnecki, vice chair of ECPAT Germany, an alliance of 28 children’s rights institutions.Some use translation apps to communicate with victims in countries as far afield as Vietnam, she said.Opponents of the new directive, called the European Electronic Communications Code, also fear that banning detection tools in Europe could prompt tech firms to stop using them elsewhere, because they have global teams to moderate content.“If a company in the EU stops using this technology overnight, they would stop using it all over the world,” said Emilio Puccio, coordinator of the European Parliament Intergroup on Children’s Rights.Highly effectiveThe tools have proven highly effective at tackling online abuse and tech companies provide law enforcement authorities with about two thirds of the child sexual abuse reports they receive, children’s rights campaigners say.Facebook, Microsoft, and Google did not respond to requests for comment.In 2019, the United States-based nonprofit National Center for Missing & Exploited Children received 16.9 million reports from technology companies related to suspected online child sexual exploitation.If the directive is approved, the ban would cover anti-grooming tools used to detect suspicious activity and “classifier” tools, which help identify pictures and videos that are not already in a database of illegal content.Leftist members of the European Parliament led by German Socialist Birgit Sippel led the push to ban the use of automatic scanning, arguing that the way the tools are currently used violates privacy and data protection rights.They were particularly concerned that users of chat and other communication platforms could have the content of private conversations analyzed.“Even voluntary measures by private companies constitute an interference with those rights when the measures involve monitoring and analysis of content of communications and processing of personal data,” their draft proposals said.Ms. Sippel could not be reached for comment, but those in favor of keeping automatic scanning say privacy fears are unfounded.“Their sole purpose is to identify and flag abuse of children, not to read or spy into private communications,” Ms. Setter said.Anti-grooming technology uses the same mechanisms as spam or malware filters, so poses no greater threat to privacy, said MEP Hilde Vautmans.“We use these technologies to protect our computers, and we should be able to continue to use the same technologies to protect our own children from sexual abuse,” she said.This story was reported by The Thomson Reuters Foundation.

28 - ‘Free speech social media’? Three questions about Parler.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1201/Free-speech-social-media-Three-questions-about-Parler
Launched in 2018, social media platform Parler markets itself as “the world’s premier free speech platform.” It first made headlines as a refuge for conservative provocateurs who had been banned from Twitter for violating that company’s terms of service. Now, in the wake of the election, millions of new users have joined Parler, pushing it to the top of the App Store charts and further into the mainstream. Q: How does Parler work?From a user experience, the platform mirrors Twitter, just with different lingo. In the same way you would retweet or like a tweet, users can “echo” or “upvote” a “parley.” Posts can include up to 1,000 characters, as well as images, gifs, or videos. To access certain features like direct messaging, you need to provide proof of identification. Although Parler calls itself “unbiased social media,” and CEO John Matze says the site was never meant to become a conservative bastion, endorsements from figures such as Senator Ted Cruz and Fox News host Sean Hannity have raised the company’s profile as a viable right-wing challenger to Twitter. The Wall Street Journal reported that heiress Rebekah Mercer – whose family has backed other companies such as Cambridge Analytica, a consulting firm that worked on Donald Trump's 2016 campaign – is bankrolling the project. The company does not currently accept advertising. Audrey Courty, a Ph.D. candidate studying social media and political extremism at Griffith University in Brisbane, Australia, says it makes sense that Parler would embrace the surge in popularity regardless of the founder’s intent. “At the end of the day, Parler is a business,” she says. “It’s not in their interest to just be a niche platform, but at the moment, it’s a very good strategy to get yourself off the ground.”Q: Can you really post anything? No. The company says they follow the Federal Communications Commission’s guidelines on violent or obscene speech. In a post on Parler, Mr. Matze outlined the “very few basic rules”: No pornography, no death threats, and, he wrote, no “posting pictures of your fecal matter in the comment section.”Parler claims to give users the power to moderate their feeds but experts point out that it more or less operates like a regular social media company. Parler makes it clear in the user agreement it retains the right to terminate an account or remove content for any reason. While debunked claims about voter fraud and QAnon theories are flourishing unchecked, and white supremacist and anti-Semitic ideas are not hard to find, some liberal users have reported being banned from the site after criticizing the company’s legal practices.Benedict Evans, an independent tech analyst, says crackdowns are expected on any growing platform. “Everyone is a fan of free speech until they have some users,” he says.Q: What does this mean for Silicon Valley?It’s unlikely that Parler will replace Twitter. While its earliest champions had nowhere else to turn, today’s top Parler users have remained active on mainstream social media. Outrage over Twitter’s handling of the president’s tweets may have doubled Parler’s user base, which is now reportedly 10 million, but that is still a far cry from Twitter’s monthly active user base of nearly 70 million in the United States alone.But that doesn’t necessarily mean Parler is likely to disappear completely. Mr. Evans says he can imagine the company “dibbling along” for another decade if the Mercers keep funding it and it’s not torpedoed by a scandal – like a “parley” leading to offline violence. That’s what Ms. Courty calls dangerous speech, which most people across the political spectrum agree needs to be regulated.“What we can’t agree on is how to regulate it, who should regulate it, and what it is,” she says. So far, a group of white, male developers in Silicon Valley have been making those decisions, with little to no transparency. That’s certainly not working, says Ms. Courty, but she doubts Mr. Matze – a white, male developer based in Nevada – has the answer.

29 - Why Big Tech faces rising pressure in Congress and courts
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1119/Why-Big-Tech-faces-rising-pressure-in-Congress-and-courts
For the past two decades, the U.S. government has taken a relatively hands-off approach to Silicon Valley, as tech companies have gained increasing influence over our day-to-day lives.But that may be changing. Google, Facebook, and Twitter confront a series of government actions aimed at restricting their behavior, and are besieged by questions from Congress over how their platforms moderate the flow of information. Q: Is Big Tech playing “monopoly”?An October report prepared by Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee outlined what the committee says are anti-competitive practices by digital-era firms like Apple and Amazon. The report quoted Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg mulling the price worth paying to buy up competitors – as the company has done with platforms like Instagram. Now  after years on the sidelines, antitrust regulators are taking action, at least in one case. On Oct. 20, the U.S. Justice Department sued Google for using anticompetitive practices to maintain its dominance over search and search advertising. The suit claims that the company blocks rivals by paying device manufacturers to make Google their default search engine. “The end result,” U.S. Attorney General William Barr said, “is that no one can feasibly challenge Google’s dominance.” Google called the lawsuit “deeply flawed.” “People use Google because they choose to, not because they’re forced to, or because they can’t find alternatives,” said the company in a statement.The suit mirrors the government’s successful 1998 case that said Microsoft forced computer manufacturers to bundle its web browser with its Windows operating system, thus locking out competitors.Q: What about digital-era free speech?When two congressional committees recently called for tech CEOs to testify, the reason was concern about America’s information diet, not just preserving competitive markets. On Oct. 28, the Senate Commerce Committee focused on potential changes to Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act of 1996, which protects internet companies from liability for what people say on their platforms, but also allows them to moderate their content as they see fit. The hearing touched a nerve with Republican senators, who blasted the CEOs of Google, Twitter, and Facebook for alleged anti-conservative bias. The Senate Judiciary Committee, meanwhile, is focused on complaints that digital platforms intentionally limited the spread of a controversial New York Post article about Hunter Biden, which ran as his father, former Vice President and now President-elect Joe Biden, was in the final days of the presidential race.This Tuesday, Republicans on the committee grilled Mr. Zuckerberg and Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey over their content moderation policies, with some, such as Senator Marsha Blackburn of calling for reform of Section 230.Mr. Biden, in a July interview, said that the rule should not apply to Facebook and similar platforms. “[Facebook] is not merely an internet company,” he said. “It is propagating falsehoods they know to be false.”The American Civil Liberties Union demurs: “Section 230 defines Internet culture as we know it,” the group says on its website. It’s why websites “can offer platforms for critical and controversial speech without constantly worrying about getting sued.”Q: What does this mean for the future?While the tech industry delivers many benefits to society, governments around the world have been showing a rising interest in regulation. The worries include that digital platforms may be encouraging tech overuse and eroding privacy among consumers, curbing competition among businesses, and failing to adequately manage their societal role as gatekeepers of information. With a politically divided Senate, prospects for U.S. legislative action remain uncertain. But tighter antitrust oversight appears to be already taking shape, and many Democrats in Congress support legislation to break up tech monopolies. “It would be a historical anomaly if tech were not to be robustly regulated, as other systemically important industries such as banking and food were before it,” writes The Economist.Writing in Jacobin, a leftist magazine that recently had a video removed from Facebook without explanation, Nicole Aschoff agreed that public opinion is shifting in favor of regulation. “Preserving the internet as a place of free expression while simultaneously protecting the electoral process, shielding users from harassment and abuse, and reining in the power of hate groups is an incredibly difficult task,” she wrote in July. “Indeed, one could argue that it is a defining challenge of the present moment.”

30 - Online exams raise concerns of racial bias in facial recognition
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1117/Online-exams-raise-concerns-of-racial-bias-in-facial-recognition
When law student Areeb Khan tried to sign into the online portal to take his practice bar exam, he was met with a strange message: “Due to poor lighting we are unable to identify your face.”Additional lighting did not solve the issue. Mr. Khan even tried to sign in from the brightest room in his New York apartment – the bathroom.Mr. Khan began to suspect that it was his dark skin tone that rattled Examplify, a test proctoring platform adopted by New York state’s law exam board during the COVID-19 pandemic. It took days of back and forth with customer service before he could sign in.“There are so many systematic barriers preventing people like me from obtaining these degrees – and this is just another example of that,” he told the Thomson Reuters Foundation.As COVID-19 restrictions force students to take remote exams, universities around the world are relying on proctoring software like Examplify. But many students are wary of the technology, not just because of bias in facial recognition but also because of the potential for data collection.“Students are already under tremendous pressure because of the global pandemic,” said Hye Jung Han, a researcher at advocacy group Human Rights Watch who specializes in technology and education. “And now we have this invasive and unfair surveillance pushing the envelope, invading their private lives.”Industry leaders maintain their platforms are a critical part of the infrastructure that allows students to continue learning.“We believe that many lives have been positively impacted by being able to continue their education and careers,” said Nici Sandberg, spokeswoman for ExamSoft, which makes the Examplify platform.“ExamSoft maintains a non-biased identification and exam delivery process to ensure that individuals of color are not disproportionately affected.”Global expansionMore than 90% of countries have instituted some form of remote learning since the start of the pandemic, according to a report in August by UNICEF.This, in turn, has created a booming business for companies dealing in educational technology – or edtech – including firms that specialize in ensuring remote exams are free from cheating.One firm, Proctorio, reported that it was proctoring more than five times the number of exams this year compared to last year.The remote proctoring industry offers a range of services, from basic video links that allow another human to observe students as they take exams to algorithmic tools that use artificial intelligence (AI) to detect cheating.But asking students to install software to monitor them during a test raises a host of fairness issues, experts say.“There’s a big gulf between what this technology promises, and what it actually does on the ground,” said Audrey Watters, a researcher on the edtech industry who runs the website Hack Education.“[They] assume everyone looks the same, takes tests the same way, and responds to stressful situations in the same way.”Facial recognition systems – which some proctoring platforms use to confirm the identity of the test taker – are less accurate with dark-skinned people, noted Shea Swauger, a researcher who tracks the industry at the University of Colorado, Denver.And algorithms designed to detect suspicious movement will inevitably flag disabled students and others who do not move in the way the platforms expect, he added.Students also are balking at allowing third-party software access to their devices, with some services requiring that students give them permission to read their computer files, monitor their keystrokes, and analyze their biometrics.“It’s not just [about] racial bias,” said Miguel Bishop, a member of the student senate at California State University in Chico, which uses the platform Proctorio for exams.“There’s the unaccountable data collection and the damage to the student-teacher relationship,” he said.Proctorio CEO Mike Olsen said in a phone interview that the platform is the most convenient way for schools to deal with cheating in the COVID era.“Taking an exam in the comfort of your own home, on your own schedule, is less invasive,” he said.Critics of the technology often misunderstand how it works, he added, emphasizing that the tools do not directly identify cheaters, but simply flag suspicious behavior to universities.Students rebelStudents in various countries have been demanding their schools reconsider the use of remote proctoring software, with mixed results.In September, the Supreme Court of India canceled a remotely proctored admissions exam at the National Law School of India University, after a parent of a prospective student and a former university official filed a lawsuit.They argued that the exam – which was slated to use AI to detect cheaters – was unfair to students with “lesser means and from marginalized areas” who might not have high speed internet or fast enough computers to run the exam.Students at the University of Queensland in Australia have been unsuccessfully petitioning the university to rein in what they consider to be the most invasive and potentially discriminatory aspects of ProctorU, an American proctoring service the school uses.“We’ve asked them to do things like in-house identity verification, rather than having [the platform] read our ID and do biometric analysis on our faces,” said Rowan Evans, a student representative at the school.Jennifer Buckley, an engineering professor at the University of Delaware, decided not to use ProctorU after she heard from her students that proctors had interrupted remote exams and asked students to show they weren’t cheating.“No thank you,” she said. “I’d rather my students not feel like they’re in a police state.”She and her assistants use Zoom to proctor exams themselves.ProctorU chief executive officer Scott McFarland said that “students should be reassured that all testing data is owned by their schools, not the proctoring provider.”“Schools set the rules about what data is collected, how it’s retained and for how long,” he said in an emailed statement.In the United States and Canada, students at dozens of universities have sent petitions criticizing exam proctoring technology, according to a tally by the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a digital rights non-profit.Patrick Sullivan, a sophomore at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, created one such petition after a math professor asked him to install the remote proctoring service Respondus for an exam in September.He said the software, which is designed to block access to certain functions on a computer while a student takes an exam, would gain access to files on his personal device. “Giving software this much access is playing with fire,” he said.Jodi Feeney, the chief operating officer of Respondus, said that “our applications have also been closely analyzed by hundreds of customers along the way – university security teams, IT staff, students, third-party companies.”
After 1,200 students signed Mr. Sullivan’s petition demanding the school ban the software, the university announced that professorscould not mandate its use.As the pandemic makes remote learning a long-term state of affairs for many schools, Mr. Swauger, in Denver, recommends that schools take some time to do their research and only roll out systems that are proven to work.“Higher ed [institutions] like to perceive themselves as serious, deliberative, evidence-based research institutions,” he said. “When it comes to these systems, that’s all been going out the window.”This story was reported by the Thomson Reuters Foundation. Additional reporting was contributed by Rina Chandran.

31 - Telescope sales and stargazers are both looking up these days
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/2020/1218/Telescope-sales-and-stargazers-are-both-looking-up-these-days
Marianne Denton was looking forward to seeing the rock band Tool in concert this summer with her husband and adult son. But then the pandemic hit, and the show was canceled. So Ms. Denton turned her attention to a different stage: the night sky. With the concert tickets refund, Ms. Denton bought her first telescope so that she could explore the cosmos from her backyard in Reno, Nevada. “It gives me a chance to explore when I can’t go anywhere,” Ms. Denton says.Ms. Denton isn’t alone. Telescope retailers typically see an uptick during celestial events like eclipses or comets. Indeed, a rare event next week, when Jupiter and Saturn align in what some are calling a “Christmas star” because of the timing, is generating stargazing excitement. It is predicted to appear in the sky on Monday evening, which happens to be the same day as the winter solstice.But this year, sales have gone through the roof, no cosmic alignment needed.“There’s no single day event that’s going to lift the entire industry as much as something like what we’re experiencing now where people have the time, they have the reason,” says Dustin Gibson, CEO of Oceanside Photo & Telescope in Carlsbad, California. In the company’s 74 years, he says, this is the largest influx of amateur astronomy customers ever.Many more people have been gazing at the night sky during the pandemic, often seeking to fill voids left in their lives. With travel restrictions, theaters closed, parties banned, and concerts canceled, amateur astronomy offers a tantalizing replacement. “If I hadn’t gotten that ticket refund,” Ms. Denton says, “I would’ve gone to that concert and I wouldn’t have purchased a telescope.”Finding connection from afarThe pandemic makes astronomy a fitting hobby, says Mr. Gibson. People can do it alone in their backyard. But it also offers ways to connect with others virtually, as people post their astrophotography on social media and share celestial experiences at a time when they can’t be physically together.Furthermore, the night sky itself can be a unifying view, says Shannon Schmoll, director of the Abrams Planetarium at Michigan State University. “Right now, we’re all separated. We don’t get to see our families right now. We don’t get to see our friends. We don’t get to see other people. But all over the world, everyone sees the same stars,” she says. “And so we have that shared experience by going outside to look up … and that is something that can connect us.”Some amateur astronomers, like Mike Kieran in Palo Alto, California, have also found ways to share stargazing with a few friends in a socially distanced manner, setting up telescopes six or more feet apart under the same sky.“It rekindles one’s sense of wonderment,” Mr. Kieran says. “When you look at the night sky, you appreciate the depth and the distances and the scale and the unbelievable beauty.”A cosmic boom The pandemic has been almost too good for telescope makers. “We’ve been sold out of telescopes really since the middle of summer,” says Michael Bieler, president of Astronomics in Norman, Oklahoma. Since his father founded the company in 1979, Mr. Bieler says this is the biggest boom they’ve seen – and the industry wasn’t prepared.“It caught every manufacturer flat footed because they don’t have inventory,” he says. And as a result, some orders placed over the summer are just now being filled.While many telescope orders this year have come from people exploring the hobby for the first time, Mr. Bieler says some of the boom has also come from what he calls “zombie astronomers.” These are people who bought or were gifted telescopes long ago but haven’t used them in perhaps decades. During the pandemic, they’ve sought to resurrect the hobby. Mr. Bieler estimates about 10% of phone calls this year have come from such customers looking for replacement parts or user manuals.Tom Frazier in Vienna, Virginia, is one of those amateur astronomers who dusted off his old telescope. “I figured, well, if I can’t go anywhere, I’ll just go visit the planets,” he says.Mr. Frazier had purchased the telescope 15 years ago to peer at Mars in a year when it was particularly prominent. But since then, the telescope and tripod had been collecting dust in his garage.“It was like a reeducation. What I had managed to learn, I had forgotten,” he says. “There was a long time when I wasn’t using the telescope, but I’m still glad I bought it.”Retailers aren’t the only ones who’ve noted a rise in amateur astronomy during the pandemic. The Abrams Planetarium at Michigan State University puts out a sky calendar for stargazers to know what to look for each month. Not only has there been a notable uptick in subscribers, says planetarium director Dr. Schmoll, but many people who let their subscription lapse a decade or two ago have also renewed it this year.“We can’t do a lot right now,” Dr. Schmoll says. “But people, I think, are also getting tired of screens and looking for a screen-free way of engaging.”No telescope neededThe cosmos is accessible to anyone – you don’t need a telescope, says Dr. Schmoll. “You can just go outside and look up.”With the naked eye, she says, you can watch the moon change phases. You can see planets. You can see meteor showers. “You can go outside and see this surprise comet that we had this summer,” she says, referring to the comet NEOWISE. “That was fantastic. That was a really nice bright point this year, pun intended.”Another unique opportunity for stargazing comes this weekend into next week. Jupiter and Saturn currently appear in our night sky at the same time. And, in the twilight on Monday night, they will be passing so close to each other’s path that they might appear as one object, which is being called a “Christmas star.” Although the two planets’ paths converge every 20 years in our sky, they rarely pass so closely to each other and typically aren’t visible from Earth when they do. Saturn and Jupiter haven’t appeared this close together and visible from Earth in centuries. This celestial event is also particularly compelling for Earthlings, says Dr. Schmoll, because, as long as there are no clouds, you can see it from anywhere in the world – including in some places where light pollution blots out the stars. “We can all go outside and see Jupiter and Saturn converging, all over the world,” Dr. Schmoll says. Stargazing can also offer a much-needed escape from reality at a time when Americans’ mental health is growing precarious. During the pandemic, depression among adults has tripled and alcohol consumption has risen 262%, according to two studies in September in the Journal of the American Medical Association.“When it’s dark outside and you’re with a telescope and you’re looking at a nebula or a planet, that’s all you’re thinking about,” Mr. Bieler says. “It becomes like meditation. ... You are stuck in the moment and not worried about anything else outside of you.”

32 - Moon rock samples brought to Earth for first time in 44 years
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/Spacebound/2020/1217/Moon-rock-samples-brought-to-Earth-for-first-time-in-44-years
A Chinese lunar capsule returned to Earth on Thursday with the first fresh rock samples from the moon in more than 40 years, offering the possibility of new insights into the history of the solar system and marking a new landmark for China’s rapidly advancing space program.The capsule of the Chang’e 5 probe landed just before 2 a.m. Thursday Beijing time in the Siziwang district of the Inner Mongolia region, the China National Space Administration reported.The capsule had earlier separated from its orbiter module and performed a bounce off Earth’s atmosphere to reduce its speed before passing through and floating to the ground on parachutes. Following recovery, the capsule and its cargo of samples were flown to the space program’s campus in Beijing to begin the process of disassembly and analysis, the space administration said.The mission achieved new firsts for the lunar exploration program in collecting samples, launching a vehicle from the moon’s surface, and docking it with the capsule to return the samples to Earth, the administration said.“As our nation’s mostly complex and technically groundbreaking space mission, Chang’e 5 has achieved multiple technical breakthroughs ... and represents a landmark achievement,” it said.Two of the Chang’e 5’s four modules set down on the moon on Dec. 1 and collected about 4.4 pounds of samples by scooping them from the surface and drilling about 6 feet into the moon’s crust. The samples were deposited in a sealed container that was carried back to the return module by an ascent vehicle.Much to the amusement of viewers, footage run by state broadcaster CCTV showed a furry white animal, possibly a fox or rodent, running in front of the capsule as it lay on the ground, stopping briefly as if to inquire into the unfamiliar object.Chinese leader Xi Jinping, in a statement read out at the Beijing Aerospace Control Center, called it a major achievement that marked a great step forward for China’s space industry. Mr. Xi expressed hope that mission participants would continue to contribute toward building China into a major space power and national rejuvenation, state-run Xinhua News Agency said.Recovery crews had prepared helicopters and off-road vehicles to home in on signals emitted by the lunar spacecraft and locate it in the darkness shrouding the vast snow-covered region in China’s far north, long used as a landing site for China’s Shenzhou crewed spaceships.The spacecraft’s return marked the first time scientists have obtained fresh samples of lunar rocks since the former Soviet Union’s Luna 24 robot probe in 1976.The newly collected rocks are thought to be billions of years younger than those obtained earlier by the United States and Soviet Union, offering new insights into the history of the moon and other bodies in the solar system. They come from a part of the moon known as the Oceanus Procellarum, or Ocean of Storms, near a site called the Mons Rumker that was believed to have been volcanic in ancient times.As with the 842 pounds of lunar samples brought back by American astronauts from 1969 to 1972, they will be analyzed for age and composition and are expected to be shared with other countries.The age of the samples will help fill in a gap in knowledge about the history of the moon between roughly one billion and three billion years ago, Brad Jolliff, director of the McDonnell Center for the Space Sciences at Washington University in St. Louis, wrote in an email. They may also yield clues as to the availability of economically useful resources on the moon such as concentrated hydrogen and oxygen, Mr. Jolliff said.“These samples will be a treasure trove!” Mr. Jolliff wrote. “My hat is off to our Chinese colleagues for pulling off a very difficult mission; the science that will flow from analysis of the returned samples will be a legacy that will last for many, many years, and hopefully will involve the international community of scientists.”Chang’e 5 blasted off from a launch base in China’s southern island province of Hainan on Nov. 24 and appeared to have completed its highly technically sophisticated mission without a hitch.It marked China’s third successful lunar landing but the only one to lift off again from the moon. Its predecessor, Chang’e 4, became the first probe to land on the moon’s little-explored far side and continues to send back data on conditions that could affect a future extended stay by humans on the moon.The moon has been a particular focus of the Chinese space program, which says it plans to land humans there and possibly construct a permanent base. No timeline or other details have been announced.China also has joined the effort to explore Mars. In July, it launched the Tianwen 1 probe, which was carrying a lander and a robot rover to search for water.In 2003, China became the third country to send an astronaut into orbit on its own after the Soviet Union and the United States and its space program has proceeded more cautiously than the U.S.-Soviet space race of the 1960s, which was marked by fatalities and launch failures. By taking incremental steps, China appears on the path toward building a program that can sustain steady progress.The latest flight includes collaboration with the European Space Agency, which is helping to monitor the mission. Amid concerns over the Chinese space program’s secrecy and close military connections, the U.S. forbids cooperation between NASA and the Chinese program unless Congress gives its approval. That has prevented China from taking part in working at the International Space Station, something it has sought to compensate for with the launching of an experimental space station and its plans to complete a permanent orbiting outpost within the next two years.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

33 - Asteroid samples: Japanese space capsule brings ‘treasure box’ to Earth
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/Spacebound/2020/1207/Asteroid-samples-Japanese-space-capsule-brings-treasure-box-to-Earth
A small capsule containing asteroid soil samples that was dropped from 136,700 miles in space by Japan’s Hayabusa2 spacecraft landed as planned in the Australian Outback on Sunday. The capsule’s delivery completes a six-year sample-return mission and opens the door for research into finding clues to the origin of the solar system and life on Earth.After a preliminary inspection, it will be flown to Japan for research. The extremely high precision required to carry out the mission thrilled many in Japan, who said they took pride in its success. The project’s manager, Yuichi Tsuda, of the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), called the capsule a “treasure box.”What is the Hayabusa2 mission?Launched on Dec. 3, 2014, the unmanned Hayabusa2 spacecraft touched down twice on the asteroid Ryugu, 190 million miles away from Earth. The asteroid’s extremely rocky surface forced the mission’s team to revise landing plans, but the spacecraft successfully collected data and soil samples during the year and a half it spent near Ryugu after arriving there in June 2018.In its first touchdown in February 2019, the spacecraft collected surface dust samples, similar to NASA’s recent touch-and-go grab by Osiris REx on the asteroid Bennu. Hayabusa2 later blasted a crater into the asteroid’s surface and then collected underground samples from the asteroid, a first for space history. In late 2019, Hayabusa2 left Ryugu. That yearlong journey ended Sunday.Japan hopes to use the expertise and technology used in the Hayabusa2 in the future, perhaps in its 2024 MMX sample-return mission to a Martian moon.Why an asteroid?Asteroids orbit the sun but are much smaller than planets. They are among the oldest objects in the solar system and therefore may contain clues into how Earth evolved. Scientists say that requires studying samples from such celestial objects.Ryugu in Japanese means “Dragon Palace,” the name of a sea-bottom castle in a Japanese folk tale.Japan’s research into asteroids also may contribute to resource development and to finding ways to protect Earth from collisions with big meteorites, said Hitoshi Kuninaka, JAXA’s vice president.What’s inside the capsule?The pan-shaped capsule, about 15 inches in diameter, contains soil samples taken from two different sites on the asteroid. Some gases might also be embedded in the samples. The preliminary inspection at a lab in Australia was to extract and analyze the gas. The capsule is due to return to Japan on Tuesday. It will be taken to JAXA’s research center in Sagamihara, near Tokyo.What can asteroid samples tell us?Scientists say the samples, especially ones taken from under the asteroid’s surface, contain data from 4.6 billion years ago unaffected by space radiation and other environmental factors. They are particularly interested in studying organic materials in the samples to learn about how they are distributed in the solar system and if or how they are related to life on Earth. JAXA President Hiroshi Yamakawa said he believes analysis of the samples may help explain the origins of the solar system and how water helped to bring life to Earth. Fragments brought back from Ryugu can also tell its collision and thermal history.After about a year, some of the samples will be shared with NASA and other international scientists. About 40% of them will be stored for future research. JAXA mission manager Makoto Yoshikawa said just 0.1 gram of the sample can be enough to conduct the planned research, though he said more would be better.Why is Hayabusa2 such a big deal for Japan?Hayabusa2 is a successor of the original Hayabusa mission that Japan launched in 2003. After a series of technical setbacks, it sent back samples from another asteroid, Itokawa, in 2010. The spacecraft was burned up in a failed re-entry but the capsule made it to Earth.Many Japanese were impressed by the first Hayabusa spaceship’s return, which was considered a miracle given all the troubles it encountered. JAXA’s subsequent Venus and Mars missions also were flawed. Mr. Tsuda said the Hayabusa2 team used all the hard lessons learned from the earlier missions to accomplish a 100 times better than “perfect” outcome. Some members of the public who watched the event shed tears as the capsule successfully entered the atmosphere, briefly flaring into a fireball.What’s next?About an hour after separating from the capsule at 136,700 miles from Earth, Hayabusa2 was sent on another mission to the smaller asteroid, 1998KY26. That is an 11-year journey one-way. The mission is to study possible ways to prevent big meteorites from colliding with Earth.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

34 - India’s fossil heritage is vast. It’s also under threat.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/2020/1202/India-s-fossil-heritage-is-vast.-It-s-also-under-threat
In 1981, geologists conducting a mineral survey in a cement quarry in Balasinor, Gujarat, in western India, stumbled upon thousands of fossilized dinosaur eggs. Paleontologists believe that at least seven species of dinosaur lived here – perhaps the most famous being the squat, two-legged, carnivorous Rajasaurus narmadensis .In the neighboring area of Raiyoli, researchers have uncovered fossils of about 10,000 dinosaur eggs, making it one of the world’s largest known dinosaur hatcheries. Significant discoveries are still being made across the country. In 2017, the fossil bones of a Shringasaurus, a horned, herbivorous dinosaur, were discovered  in red mudstone of the Denwa formation, in Madhya Pradesh. “There’s an incredible wealth out there, an almost parallel India,” says Anupama Chandrasekaran, a journalist who’s been compiling India’s fossil discoveries on her podcast and website Desi Stones and Bones.But the region’s fossils, like much of India’s paleontological heritage, remain under threat from vandals, opportunists, and indifferent public officials. Dinosaur eggs are sold for as little as $7  in small villages, for instance. Other fossil sites are destroyed through deforestation and mining.“Paleontology suffers in India from various factors, says Ashok Sahni, a geologist at Panjab University whom the Times of India has called  the “father of Indian paleontology.” “Vandalism of fossils is rampant, as there are no laws that protect these precious finds. Lack of access to sites is the main problem, as landowners can arbitrarily shut down mining sites.” A rich fossil heritageThe Indian subcontinent, which collided with Eurasia about 10 million years after nonavian dinosaurs went extinct, is home to fossils found nowhere else, including the 80-ton Bruhathkayosaurus and the chicken-sized Alwalkeria.  The first  dinosaur bones in Asia were found in India by a British captain in one of the East India Co.’s armies in 1828, in Jabalpur, thirteen years before the word “dinosaur” was coined. Ever since then many bones, nests, and eggs have been found across the country. India has passionate amateur fossil collectors like Vishal Verma, a high school physics teacher, who has rescued dozens of fossilized dinosaur nests and eggs and rare extinct sharks in Bagh in the Narmada Valley, and Mohansingh Sodha, who has collected fossils for nearly 50 years.Dr. Sahni grew up around talk of fossils and dinosaurs with his father, grandfather, and uncle, all eminent paleontologists. “India has the largest number of eggs and dinosaur nests from about 68 million years ago, deposited during a time of volcanic activity. We also have a lot of coprolites – fossilized dinosaur feces – which tells you what they ate and how they lived.”He also worked alongside teams of German and American scientists at the Vastan Lignite Mine, in Gujarat, western India, since 2005. They found early mammals including horses and primates in these fossil-bearing layers, as well as several insects perfectly preserved in 50-million-year-old amber. “But the mine was closed down by the owner in 2015,” he says.Such frustrations are common for paleontological sites in India, say experts.  “Many geologists have come back after several years to the site of a fossil find and found it flattened, or a dump yard,” says University of Delhi geologist Guntupalli V.R. Prasad, who was part of the team that unearthed India’s first Ichthyosaur remains.“The main problem in India is that the desire for short-term commercial gains wins over the need for preservation of important sites,” Professor Prasad says. “In the Deccan Traps area, there is a spot showing layers of rocks with beautiful formations of lava flows, marine fossils and dinosaur nesting sites, but the site is being quarried, with apathy on the part of the government officials.”A “grand vision”Even legal protections aren’t always sufficient to protect these sites. In 1997, some 70 acres that covered the nesting sites were designated as the Balasinor Dinosaur Fossil Park. But with minimal security and policing, vandalism and looting of the fossils abounds.Without economic incentives and criminal punishments to protect India’s fossil sites, say observers, these paleontological treasure troves could be lost forever.“Many governments have talked about a well-curated national repository, but unless there is real political will backed by funds, nothing will happen. Strict laws should also be framed for theft, smuggling, procuring, and damaging fossils,” says Dr. Sahni.Intergenerational continuity is also critical, says Sunil Bajpai, a vertebrate paleontologist at the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, who in 2008 helped discover the closest land relative to whales, in Kashmir. “The biggest problem before an Indian paleontologist is that when he leaves a university, the person who replaces him is not interested in his specimen collections or if he retires, the problem is, where does he deposit the finds,” Dr. Bajpai says.  “Young children should be educated on evolution and how long it took for something to come into existence, only then will they understand the need to preserve biodiversity,” he says.To Dhananjay Mohabey, a paleontologist at RTM Nagpur University who has extensively studied the dinosaur fossils at Balasinor, India’s fossil heritage holds tremendous promise.“In spite of all the criticism about paleontology in India, the GSI [Geological Survey of India] is a storehouse of meteorites, fossils and bones of prehistoric animals collected over 150 years, and its extensive collections in Kolkata are available to researchers,” he says. “All the discoveries and fossil finds are funded by government money and not personal property. One has to coordinate with the local government or museums and make arrangements to showcase it, when they leave a department or retire,” he adds. “Besides fossils, the excavation sites are very significant and should be preserved and showcased to the public.”“What India needs is a grand vision,” says biochemist Pranay Lal, author of “Indica: A Deep Natural History of the Indian Subcontinent,” “a living, immersive museum or several small museums that harness the best of technology, and showcase its incredible treasures.”

35 - Trust in science becomes a political issue. How did that happen?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/2020/1123/Trust-in-science-becomes-a-political-issue.-How-did-that-happen
Science has become a politically polarizing issue. A global report found Americans are three times more likely to trust scientists if they identify as left-wing, a political divide that makes the United States an outlier internationally.The survey by the Pew Research Center found that global publics mainly trust scientists to do what is in the public's best interest. But attitudes vary with political ideology, according to results compiled just before the COVID-19 outbreak.This sparks questions about the role of science now and following the pandemic.The questionnaire study asked people across the globe to share their views on science relating to big public policy issues such as climate change and artificial intelligence. Interviews were held by phone or face-to-face.“We saw an increase in confidence in scientists but that increase only came from Democrats and not Republicans,” says Cary Funk, director of science and society research at the Pew Research Center.Recent presidential campaign events bear out these findings. At his rally in Carson City, Nevada, on Oct. 18., President Donald Trump mocked Joe Biden for listening to scientists on the COVID-19 pandemic. Meanwhile Mr. Biden slammed Mr. Trump for ignoring it.Studying public support for scientists and their work is a timely issue, Dr. Funk adds.“It’s of interest because it’s been widely discussed, especially in Western Europe, how much people trust expert advice. It was a good moment to think about how different publics value the place of science,” she says.Expert advice has been heavily discussed, not least by far-right movements who sometimes label the scientific community as elite. One argument is that institutions and universities provide “leftist indoctrination,” which has resulted in several counter-initiatives aimed at restoring balance.That discussion could be reflected in this study where distrust of scientists shows ties to far-right populism.What makes science polarized?Almost two-thirds of Americans who identified as left-wing said they place a lot of trust in scientists to do what is best for them. Among those who identified as right-wing that number was only 22%.Canada had a 39% difference between right- and left-wing respondents. In Australia that difference was 29% and in the United Kingdom it was 27%.Americans have the most polarized views in the world when it comes to science. But the global trend is clear: Polarization is all over the world, and most prevalent in wealthy democracies.Tom Carothers, senior vice president for studies at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, says it boils down to trust. He says that distrusting science has very little to do with political ideology and everything to do with distrust in government. “Science is just another form of authority, and if people have decided that authority is evil then science is evil, too.”An age of distrustThere are a couple of reasons we have been in an age of distrust for the past 20 or 30 years, says Mr. Carothers. Long economic stagnation in the West and concentration of power in elites likely play a role. But migration and rapid change brought on by technology are also key, he says.“People feel things are moving too fast. They want things to slow down and they want things to stay the same. Therefore they distrust the government that is leading the change,” he says.Mr. Carothers points out that distrust of government is more common in wealthier countries, where freedom of speech is sacred. “Wealthy democracies have a lot of freedom of expression and not a single source of information. Therefore if you are distrustful you can find your own community of people.”He argues social media’s only real role in creating divisions is connecting people who are already dissatisfied.The COVID-19 stress testDistrust in authority and polarized views could be accentuated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which Mr. Carothers refers to as a government stress test.“A lot of countries are suffering and they are questioning the experts. They seem to have all the scientific expertise but it doesn’t work … it doesn’t make you very confident in scientific expertise,” he says.On the other hand, former New Jersey Gov. Christine Todd Whitman says the pandemic could have unexpected positive outcomes. “People are seeing the mishandling of COVID-19. It’s really the No. 1 issue in the [presidential] campaign ... which tells you that people are saying that we should have listened to the scientists.”She mentions polls show people trust Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, more than Mr. Trump on the coronavirus pandemic.Ms. Whitman says the Trump administration has contributed to a distrust in scientists among Republicans during the pandemic. “It’s never reached the peak that it has now and that’s because we have a president who just does not want to hear about science. And unfortunately we are seeing the negative impact of disregarding science with the COVID response.”Reuse of any BU Statehouse Program materials requires specific written permission from the author.

36 - From Ella to Beyoncé: New museum celebrates African American music
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/Music/2021/0115/From-Ella-to-Beyonce-New-museum-celebrates-African-American-music
When Marquita Reed-Wright was hired to curate a new museum of Black music, she began amassing a unique catalog of artifacts. Among them: Ella Fitzgerald’s fur coat, Louis Armstrong’s trumpet, and an accordion that belonged to zydeco icon “Queen Ida” Guillory. She even drove to funk musician George Clinton’s home in “the middle of nowhere” of northern Florida so that he could hand her his stage costumes – including his rainbow-colored wig. The 1,500 items Dr. Reed-Wright has collected will be displayed at the National Museum of African American Music in Nashville. The ribbon-cutting ceremony for the $60 million museum is on Jan. 18, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, with the doors officially opening to the public on Jan. 30.What most distinguishes this collection is the story it tells. The museum chronicles the rise of African American music and, by extension, the history of Black culture and identity. More than that, it reveals how central African American music has been to America’s culture. As such, the museum sees itself as a unifier, where all visitors can appreciate a shared humanity through a common love of music.“I don’t think the significance or importance of this type of museum can be overstated,” says Shana Redmond, a scholar of music, race, and politics at the UCLA Herb Alpert School of Music. “It’s actually really urgent to establish a location and a concerted effort by experts to explore and document these histories for the public. Black music is really a locus of incredible creation, incredible thought.”A journey through historyThe museum, situated across the street from Nashville’s Ryman Auditorium, is 56,000 square feet and includes a 200-seat theater. It represents more than 50 genres and subgenres, including gospel, blues, jazz, R&B, soul, disco, and hip-hop. (If music had a periodic table of elements, they’d form a sizable block under the recurring properties of rhythm and groove.) Various interactive stations throughout the museum encourage visitors to click on the names of individual artists to learn more about them, their influences, and their impact. Those stations also generate playlists for later exploration.“Some of the interactives we have you can download and share with people after you leave the museum,” says Dr. Reed-Wright, the museum’s collections manager. “The concept of community is being able to share that.” Each of the museum’s seven galleries pinpoints a different aspect of the African American experience. For instance, the Wade in the Water space focuses on religious music, from Indigenous African music through the spirituals and hymns of the slavery era to the gospel music of the 1940s to 1960s. The Crossroads gallery tells the story of the blues – including its influence on country music and rock and roll – and how the 1940s Great Migration of southern Black workers introduced the blues to northern cities. In another gallery called The Message, visitors can engage in rap battles with each other while learning about urban hip-hop culture. A fusion of political and cultural powerToday, hip-hop dominates popular culture. But it took lifetimes of incremental steps for Black music to attain widespread recognition. In the 1800s, many white people first heard traditional songs composed by enslaved people when minstrels in blackface performed them. Later, “We Shall Overcome” was popularized by folk singer Pete Seeger, but it was originally a 19th-century spiritual that took off as a rallying song for a workers’ union of Black women in Charleston, South Carolina. Early jazz and blues music was segregated between Black and white recording artists. It was only after the 1930s that the likes of Nat King Cole, Marian Anderson, Billie Holliday, Duke Ellington, and Count Basie crossed over the racial divide. As white listeners became fans of those musicians, their relationship to Blackness was slowly disrupted, says Ms. Redmond, the musicologist. That didn’t mean that white audiences embraced integration as a result. Attitudes were slow to change. But, later, Black musicians, including Nina Simone, Aretha Franklin, and Harry Belafonte, had an impact by taking a stand for civil rights. They weren’t just stars, they were also political figures. As Ms. Redmond puts it: “It’s not simply, ‘I’m a Black musician.’ So, if you like me, you have to feel differently about Blackness. You have to wrestle with all of me, not just me as a movie star. It’s also me as the person who’s struggling toward a better future for all of us.”That fusion of political and cultural power moved the needle far further than ever before, says Ms. Redmond, who isn’t affiliated with the museum.“All of us have a seat at the table”The museum’s One Nation Under a Groove gallery, dedicated to the fight for civil rights from the 1940s to the present, includes a section about African Americans’ influence as CEOs and producers behind the music. It traces Black empowerment in the music industry. In 1982, Michael Jackson’s “Thriller,” produced by Quincy Jones, became the world’s best-selling album. In recent decades, some of the world’s major superstars have been Black – think Prince, Whitney Houston, Rihanna, Jay-Z, Beyoncé, and many others.The museum’s mission is to educate, preserve, and celebrate that heritage, says President and CEO H. Beecher Hicks III. But, he adds, the death of George Floyd last year offered a pointed reminder of America’s racial disparities. It inspired his team to work with newfound vigor because they believe in the museum’s message – one that has special resonance, he says, following the recent insurrection at the Capitol.  “We are able to proudly say that African Americans are at the center of American culture without turning anyone away, without condemning anyone, but instead welcoming everyone and saying, ‘This is American music and all of us have a seat at the table,’” says Mr. Hicks. “As we prepare to open on Martin Luther King Day, we have to learn to live together as brothers rather than perish together as fools, as MLK would say. And we don’t have to be angry at one another to celebrate one another. We can celebrate together.” 

37 - Dr. King was tracked by the FBI. In ‘MLK/FBI,’ filmmakers explore why.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/Movies/2021/0114/Dr.-King-was-tracked-by-the-FBI.-In-MLK-FBI-filmmakers-explore-why
“MLK/FBI,” a new documentary directed by Sam Pollard, is about many things, all of them pertinent. But its central focus is how J. Edgar Hoover’s FBI relentlessly surveilled and harassed Martin Luther King Jr. throughout his career. Much of this documentation, which also draws on newly declassified files and restored footage, is already known. But seeing it so graphically laid out gives the whole sordid history a cumulative intensity. The FBI’s campaign against King kicked into high gear right after he delivered his famous “I Have a Dream” speech in 1963 at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington. An interagency memo called him “the most dangerous Negro in the future of this nation.”Hoover worried that King, who was widely regarded as the moral leader of the nation, would become the Black messiah. In particular, he thought Black people were especially susceptible to communist recruitment, a point King himself weighed in on when, in an interview clip in the documentary, he says, “It is amazing that so few Negroes have turned to communism in the light of their desperate plight.”But the linkage between King and the FBI’s long-standing mission to expose communist subterfuge in America is something of a Red herring, since so much of what the FBI pursued with King concerned his alleged infidelities and not his politics.Then, too, there is the salient fact that during Hoover’s reign as FBI director, which stretched almost 50 years, the agency was a nearly all-white bastion of G-men, many of them conservative, football-playing, frat boy types – the sort of men who, as pop culture icons, reflected the racial and societal biases of the era. In their minds, they were what saviors were supposed to look like. (Pollard dutifully includes clips from such Hollywood films as “I Was a Communist for the F.B.I.” and “The FBI Story.”) To those who might imagine that the FBI vendetta against King was an aberration, the work of a few rogue agents, Pollard makes it clear that the operation at that time was endemic in the agency.Pollard utilizes interviews, mostly off camera, with a range of King biographers and associates, including Andrew Young, Beverly Gage, Clarence Jones, and David Garrow, the author of the Pulitzer Prize-winning 1986 King biography “Bearing the Cross.” He also spoke with former FBI agent Charles Knox and former FBI Director James Comey, who tells about the time in 1964 when the FBI mailed audio recordings of King’s alleged affairs to his home with a note attached suggesting that King kill himself. Comey calls this “the darkest period in the bureau’s history.” The film also asks why, if the FBI so closely monitored King, it was unable to avert his assassination.To his credit, Pollard does not shy away from the controversies surrounding King’s personal life, especially the bombshell from Garrow, which he first reported in 2019 after uncovering some FBI files, that King may have been present during the hotel room rape of a woman by a fellow minister. It should be noted that this charge has been challenged by such historians as Jeanne Theoharis, author of an acclaimed Rosa Parks biography, who said: “It is deeply irresponsible for a historian to cast such FBI sources, which can be deeply unreliable, as fact.”Since a federal judge in 1977 ordered the FBI to turn over all of its King surveillance tapes to the National Archives and place them under seal until 2027, the clock is ticking on any damaging revelations.Should these tapes see the light of day? That’s the looming question that closes out the documentary. To some, like former agent Knox, exposing them would “serve no purpose whatsoever.”To my mind, if we are talking only about King’s extramarital affairs, this issue is something of a smokescreen. When it comes to assessing King’s legacy, it’s not exactly news that, in their private lives, great moral leaders have often failed to live up to their own ideals. As Young, one of King’s staunchest defenders, says in the film, “There’s always been this unresolved tension in who we are and who we say we are and who we want to be.” Comey says, “I’ve never met a perfect human. People are complex.”King was not a perfect man. But as this film so powerfully demonstrates, he forced a reckoning with America’s racial history that, more than ever, resonates today. It’s a reckoning he gave his life for.Peter Rainer is the Monitor’s film critic. “MLK/FBI” will be available on Jan. 15 in some theaters, and on-demand via cable networks and streaming services, including iTunes, Amazon Prime Video, and GooglePlay.

38 - Blursday, doomscrolling, and the words of 2020
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/In-a-Word/2021/0114/Blursday-doomscrolling-and-the-words-of-2020
So many people had trouble keeping track of time in 2020 that English added a new day of the week. Is today Monday? Saturday? Every day seems like Blursday to people stuck at home. At the beginning of the year, most of us had never thought about social distancing, experienced Zoom fatigue (exhaustion produced by too many online meetings), or done much doomscrolling (“obsessively scanning social media and websites for bad news,” according to the American Dialect Society).The year 2020 gave rise to so many new words – and called so many old ones back into service – that the editors at Oxford Languages couldn’t pick just one word of the year (WOTY). Because of “the phenomenal breadth of language change and development,” they decided that 2020 was “not a year that could neatly be accommodated in one single [word].” Or perhaps they had Zoom fatigue and never mustered up the energy to make a decision.Other dictionary publishers did name a WOTY, and around the world their choices were remarkably similar. Merriam-Webster picked pandemic (from 1666), which comes from the Greek pan (“all” or “every”)  plus demos (“people”). Quarantine (1470) was Cambridge Dictionary’s WOTY, while Collins chose a more recent synonym, lockdown. When this term was first used in 1973, it denoted “the confinement of prisoners to their cells for all or most of the day as a temporary security measure,” but now, the dictionary asserts, it “encapsulates the shared experience of billions of people.” The American Dialect Society selected Covid.The Dutch WOTY, according to publisher Dikke Van Dale, is anderhalvemetersamenleving, which translates to “one and a half meter society.” It refers to how far apart people in the Netherlands are supposed to keep for social distancing – about 5 feet, or approximately the space it takes to write anderhalvemetersamenleving. Japanese publisher Sanseido chose pien, a social media term used “when you’re feeling troubled or when things don’t go your way,” according to lexicographer Ono Masahiro.My nomination for WOTY is orbisculate, “to squirt juice and/or pulp into one’s eye, as from a citrus fruit.” If you’ve never heard it before, that’s because it’s not really a word – not yet, anyway. It was coined by biochemist Neil Krieger, who felt that English needed a term for these acidic attacks. Dr. Krieger died in 2020, and his children are trying to get orbisculate into the dictionary to honor his memory.This word is a beautiful way to sum up the year: It celebrates creativity, humor, and love. I’ll do my part by using orbisculate whenever I can: “This morning I was trying to peel a pomelo, and it orbisculated at me.”

39 - How will Warner Bros. streaming impact moviegoing? Three questions.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/Movies/2021/0108/How-will-Warner-Bros.-streaming-impact-moviegoing-Three-questions
Warner Bros. Pictures will debut its entire 2021 movie slate – which includes sci-fi flick “Dune,” the highly anticipated “Matrix 4,” and Sopranos prequel “The Many Saints of Newark” – on HBO Max. This is the first time a major studio has decided to put a year’s worth of would-be blockbusters online. In a Dec. 3 announcement, the chief executive of WarnerMedia Studios, which owns both Warner Bros. Pictures and HBO Max, called the move a “creative solution to address our fans, our filmmakers, and our exhibitors.” Not everyone agreed. Actors, directors, and theaters were quick to denounce Warner Bros.’ move as a bait-and-switch tactic to buoy an underperforming streaming platform, and for moviegoers and moviemakers alike, this streaming shakeup leaves many questions.Q: Can I see these 2021 films at the theater?That depends. Warner Bros. will release each of these 17 films online and simultaneously in theaters, and after the first month, a title will leave HBO Max and play exclusively at cinemas. Outside the United States, they will roll out as usual.So if your local theater is open, at full or partial capacity, the films may be available. If viewers are comfortable attending the movies, and willing to pay roughly $20 for a ticket (a monthly HBO Max subscription is $14.99), they can watch Timothée Chalamet face alien sandworms on the big screen.   For American audiences, the decision offers flexibility and positions in-house streaming services as a viable distribution mechanism, a trend that predates the pandemic but has accelerated.Q: What does this mean for theaters post-pandemic?Although Warner Bros. calls the hybrid release schedule a “temporary solution,” critics worry it could carry over into 2022 if it helps turn HBO Max – lagging behind Netflix by roughly 180 million subscribers in the third quarter  – into a real challenger. Even before Warner Bros.’ announcement, industry leaders were wondering what the moviegoing experience would look like as theaters reemerge from the pandemic with tougher competition from streaming services, and now this latest streaming strategy has fanned fears that moviegoing as we know it is through.Paul Moore, professor of sociology and media historian at Ryerson University in Toronto, doesn’t think so. He says the rise of VHS in the 1980s inspired similar apocalyptic predictions, but home videos never replaced a night at the multiplex.“Going to the movies is always about going out in public, with friends and family, but also with strangers,” he says. “That excitement of a sold-out blockbuster ... that’s something that we never get with television.”And it’s more than fuzzy feelings, he adds – it’s part of the business. Since the ’80s, movie ticket sales have only been the tip of the iceberg of studio revenue. Professor Moore says most profits come from rebroadcasting, movie rentals, and everything else that happens after a film leaves theaters. Yet the theatrical release is crucial for generating that momentum.“It’s really not clear if [streaming platforms can] generate enough buzz and awareness to have a franchise like Toy Story or Star Wars,” says Dr. Moore.Q: How will streaming affect future movies?Even if moviegoing survives, a hyperemphasis on streaming could change the industry in other ways.James Schamus, professor of professional practice at Columbia University School of the Arts, says the straight-to-streaming setup would certainly complicate the moviemaking process, in part because streaming platforms are famously opaque about their program ratings.“If you make a hit movie, it’s just one more piece of content in a gigantic pile and [without ticket sales] it’s very difficult to understand the value of that success,” says Dr. Schamus.And just as TV has become more movielike on Netflix and other streaming platforms, Dr. Moore imagines that boundary will continue to blur as movies are made with streaming services in mind.“What will probably happen is that movies will get smaller and movies will end up more like TV,” he says. “The boundary between a television series and a blockbuster movie could collapse.”

40 - Bucking predictions, some couples are bonding not breaking during pandemic
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/Family/2021/0107/Bucking-predictions-some-couples-are-bonding-not-breaking-during-pandemic
The first time Sandra Nikolajevs fell in love with her husband was two decades ago. The second time was during the spring lockdowns of 2020, when the husband and wife started taking early-morning walks together. “When you first get to know someone, you spend a lot of time talking … and then, after being married over 20 years, you take that for granted,” says Ms. Nikolajevs, the principal bassoonist for the Savannah Philharmonic. “Having this time where there is 45 minutes or an hour and nothing to do but talk about things, it’s really interesting because it’s not important stuff. It’s just ideas and things that you toss around in your head and you’re able to get feedback and have a real connection that way.” She adds, “It actually reminded me of the first days of our courtship when we met at Oberlin College.” When the lockdowns began last year, there was widespread speculation that the divorce rate would soon spike. Traditional marriage vows uttered during the bliss of a wedding day suddenly took on a gravity that may not have been fully apparent before. Indeed, for a great many couples, the pandemic made it evident that continuing their relationship was untenable. But for many husbands and wives, the greatest reset of the pandemic was that it actually drew them closer. They became more grateful for each other. Relationship experts say that the ways in which couples navigated the duress of 2020 offers lessons that are applicable for when things return to normal.“A survey came out – it’s called the American Family Survey – and it asked the couples how their experiences are in the pandemic,” says Wendy Wang, the director of research for the Institute for Family Studies. “A majority of them said that the pandemic actually made them appreciate their spouses more, and more than half of them also say their commitment has deepened.”
The annual American Family Survey, conducted by the Deseret News and the Center for the Study of Elections and Democracy at Brigham Young University, suggests that overall divorce rates won’t rise significantly as a consequence of the pandemic. The 2019 survey of 3,000 individuals found that 40% of respondents reported that their marriage was in trouble. In 2020, that figure fell to 29%. Similarly,‌ ‌data‌ ‌from‌ ‌the‌ ‌UK‌ ‌Household‌ ‌Longitudinal‌ ‌Survey Coronavirus‌ ‌Study‌ ‌of‌ ‌2,559‌ ‌parents‌ ‌revealed‌ ‌that‌ “‌twice‌ ‌as‌ ‌many‌ ‌marriages‌ ‌improved‌ ‌during lockdown compared to those that worsened‌.‌” ‌The‌ ‌proportion‌ ‌of‌ ‌couples‌ ‌considering‌ ‌divorce‌ ‌was‌ ‌two-thirds‌ ‌less‌ ‌than‌ ‌it‌ ‌had‌ ‌been‌ ‌between‌ ‌2017‌ ‌to‌ ‌2019.‌ ‌
 ‌That‌ ‌was‌ ‌despite‌ ‌the‌ ‌fact‌ ‌that‌ ‌both‌ ‌surveys‌ ‌discovered‌ ‌that‌ ‌stress‌ ‌in‌ ‌marriages‌ ‌increased‌ ‌during‌ ‌the‌ ‌pandemic.‌ ‌Indeed,‌ ‌the‌ ‌company‌ ‌Legal‌Templates‌ ‌reported‌ ‌a‌ ‌34%‌ ‌rise‌ ‌of‌ ‌sales‌ ‌of‌ ‌its‌ ‌divorce‌ ‌agreement‌ ‌form‌ ‌between‌ ‌March‌ ‌and‌ ‌April‌ ‌of‌ ‌last‌ ‌year‌ ‌compared‌ ‌to‌ ‌the‌ ‌same‌ ‌period‌ ‌in‌ ‌2019.‌ Blame concerns over the virus, financial instability, and the effect of being together around the clock, often with children, with less personal space. “I have seen good relationships get stronger but the past year has been sort of a ‘stress test’ for relationships and has exposed the flaws or weaknesses among many couples,” says Aimee Hartstein, a New York-based licensed clinical social worker, via email.For Karina Zannat O’Connell and Nicholas O’Connell, the close confines of lockdown-living quickly ended the “honeymoon period” of their new marriage. In November 2019, the couple had three weddings – two in Bangladesh for her Muslim family, and one in India for his Hindu family. Then she moved to the U.S., where he’d grown up and where they’d met in college many years previously. Mr. O’Connell’s three-bedroom New York City apartment was already shared by his two longtime roommates. Once the quarantine started, Ms. O’Connell was stuck inside with no friends in the city. While Mr. O’Connell played Dungeons & Dragons in the living room with his roommates, she retreated to a bedroom to scroll through posts on Reddit “for the 20th time.”“I remember talking to a couple of my friends and they asked, ‘How’s married life?’” says Ms. O’Connell, a self-described extrovert. “And I was like, ‘I moved here. And there’s COVID and there’s refrigerated morgue trucks. And I really resent my husband. I hate him. And they were all like, ‘Oh, my gosh, girl. You know, we’re supportive of you if you want a divorce.’”   Their talk of divorce shook Ms. O’Connell. It was time to address the situation with her husband. Mr. O’Connell listened to his wife. More than that, he responded by finding a new apartment for the couple even though he was reluctant to move. His willingness to adjust reminded his wife to intentionally focus on her husband’s good qualities – such as taking on the cat litter and dish-washing – rather than nitpicking about the bad things. “It changes the whole atmosphere of the house when your wife is happy,” says Mr. O’Connell, who adds, jokingly, “I’m just afraid if we get a dishwasher, then what will happen? I’ll get replaced.”“We’re in such a good place now that we’ve actually decided that we want to have a baby in the next six months,” adds Ms. O’Connell. “We’ve renewed our commitment to each other.” Partners in romance and financeAccording to the American Family Survey, 45% of respondents who’d experienced financial decline during the pandemic reported increased marital stress. “We have grown up in a world in which we treat marriage as all about finding your soulmate – which it is and can be – but it’s still, at the end of the day, a partnership with an economic component to it,” says Steve Horwitz, an economics professor at Ball State University in Muncie, Indiana. Dealing with unemployment and trying to make a living during the economic downturn has poked at the nonromantic aspects of marriage, says Mr. Horwitz, the author of “Hayek’s Modern Family.” Those burdens have fallen disproportionately on women, many of whom have left the labor force to care for schoolchildren at home. Yet tough economic circumstances often encourage couples to lean into each other for support. That was true of the recession of 2007 to 2009, when divorces declined by 7%. In the 2020 American Family Survey, 65% of those whose financial situation worsened said they felt a greater appreciation for their marital partner and 60% reported a deeper commitment to the marriage.Ana-Shea Fann and Stewart Edwards can attest to that. When the pandemic hit, the New Orleans-based couple had been planning a wedding for 300 people. Then she lost her job as an organizer for people facing mental challenges. Cooped up in their 900 square foot home, where they care for Ms. Fann’s ill mother, she didn’t feel it was the right time to celebrate anything – let alone ask wedding guests to travel. Mr. Edwards wasn’t keen on postponing the nuptials. He’s not easily deterred. After all, he’d been the one to drive over two hours from another town for his first date with Ms. Fann. He told her that getting married was more important than being able to have the type of big-party wedding they’d envisioned.“It took a little bit of convincing,” laughs Mr. Edwards, an industrial electrical estimator.The couple revamped their wedding by setting it in their backyard for 15 socially distanced guests. They also broadcast the ceremony via Zoom. It was a “gorgeous” event, says Ms. Fann. Days after the wedding, Mr. Edwards returned to his employer’s office for the first time since the lockdown. By 10 o’clock the same morning he was back home. He’d been laid off. “This is not a normal time where, as a married couple, you can sit down and be like, ‘OK, here’s our finance goals,’” says Ms. Fann. “It’s just like, ‘Have we made it? Can we pay the rent?’”Ms. Fann recalls something her father told her at age 16: “Ana-Shea, if you wait your whole life to be only excited about the big things, you’re going to be miserable almost all your life. You need to learn how to appreciate small stuff.”What’s sustained their relationship amid the challenges are small acts of service and remembering to give each other regular hugs, says Mr. Edwards. Date nights now consist of finding new and inventive recipes to cook. Arguments have been few and far between.“We made it so well because we have each other,” says Ms. Fann. “And that’s actually something that’s kind of rare and not the story everyone else has. I know a lot of people who’ve gotten divorced.”  Slowing down, catching upJonathan Shippey, a licensed marriage and family therapist in Louisville, Kentucky, says the unique circumstances of 2020 have revealed to some couples that their marriage was merely a functional one. The busyness of day-to-day scheduling masked underlying foundational issues.  “Some of these couples were on two parallel train tracks and they could see each other and maybe even headed in the same general direction, but they were not on the same train,” says Mr. Shippey, a master trainer at The Gottman Institute, which helps counsel married couples. Prior to the pandemic, Anika Prather says she thought her relationship to her husband Damon was “OK.” Now she realizes that if things had continued as usual, their marriage would have become dysfunctional at some point.As the co-founder with him of The Living Water School, a private school in Fort Washington, Maryland, Dr. Prather’s pre-pandemic life had been nonstop. For instance, two weeks after giving birth to the youngest of their three children, she’d gone back to work instead of taking the entire maternity leave. In those days, she and her husband weren’t bonding the way they should have been.“I was so stressed I would have moments where I was cold, not because I’m upset with him, but I was just so dead tired,” says Dr. Prather. “I wasn’t an emotionally soft person.”  When the hard brake of lockdowns stopped her perpetual motion, she toppled over. On the first day of quarantine, a longtime family friend and church member died by suicide. The same day, Dr. Prather’s cousin – who’d been like a brother to her – died of COVID-19. She was racked with guilt because they weren’t as close as they’d once been. She hadn’t had time to improve their relationship.“I just became a hermit,” says Dr. Prather, who spent her days wearing pajamas and shrouded in gloom. Soon after, she received an offer to teach at Howard University – something she’d always dreamed of. She took the offer to teach a few classes, but she couldn’t muster any excitement.“So my husband, one day, he says to me, ‘You’re going to have to cut this out,’” she recalls.He snapped her out of her funk by telling her that it’s OK to grieve but not to neglect gratitude for all the good things God had given them. Mr. Prather, an analyst for the federal government, started by expressing appreciation for his wife, as Dr. Prather recalls. “He said, ‘This is the first time in all of the 13 years that I’ve known you that I haven’t seen you running out to meet some deadlines…’ And he said, ‘That means you have been working extremely hard the entire time we’ve been married.’”  Dr. Prather and her husband began to focus on their family and asking themselves how to make the most of their time in lockdown. They spent more time together, with game nights and family walks. Mr. Prather and the oldest of their two sons grew closer while Dr. Prather realized that her daughter wanted female bonding time with her. They could see what their life could look like after the pandemic. “We became very adamant about not stopping what the virus has forced us into – slowing down, holding on to each other, enjoying ourselves, enjoying our kids, and our kids enjoying us, focusing on what’s important,” says Dr. Prather, who has figured out a way to now work part-time. “What I’m doing should not place my marriage or my children in jeopardy. I can still have my career ... but it shouldn’t compete with other things.”“My wife and I are determined not to go back to the stressful lives we had pre-pandemic!” Mr. Prather explains via email.His wife has coined a term for their experience: Corona Blessings. “As sad as it is,” she says, “it turned out to be a blessing for our family.” 

41 - Overcoming racism
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/A-Christian-Science-Perspective/2021/0115/Overcoming-racism
While there have been notable signs of progress over the years, racism remains an issue across the globe. We’ve compiled some pieces from The Christian Science Publishing Society’s archives that highlight the value of prayer in overcoming racism. Within each one you’ll find ideas to inspire your own prayers and actions to further brotherly love, equality, and justice.In a podcast called “The path to discovering our divine rights,” a woman talks about how she worked for change in the 1960s U.S. civil rights movement, and how she sees the First Commandment as a healing force that can help bring more uniform justice into the world today.The author of “Can racism be healed?” shares how we can all play a part in healing racism by meeting every temptation to feel inferior or superior to someone else with the powerful recognition of everyone’s identity as a child of God.The author of “Inherently worthy” explores how realizing that everyone has innate value as God’s child empowers us to fearlessly love others in a way that can turn a menacing situation around, and recounts an encounter with the Ku Klux Klan in which her grandmother experienced this firsthand.In “An interview: on racial prejudice,” which was published during the civil rights era in the U.S., a Black businessman and Christian Scientist shares ideas on overcoming racism.In “How can Christian Science help me address racism as a non-Black person?” the author considers how prayer can help us become more aware of ways we might inadvertently be participating in oppressive behavior, and empower us to move toward redemption and change.“Reaching beyond resistance” explores how a spiritual starting point opens the door for inward change that leads to outward progress in civil rights and other areas.

42 - In ‘The Opium Prince,’ the personal plays out amid the political
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/Book-Reviews/2021/0113/In-The-Opium-Prince-the-personal-plays-out-amid-the-political
Jasmine Aimaq’s debut novel, “The Opium Prince,” is enjoyable on multiple levels. First, it’s a captivating work of fiction that examines how its two protagonists move from guilt and despair to redemption. Second, Aimaq immerses readers into everyday life in Afghanistan with such skill that even a passage about buying freshly baked flatbread is a poetic experience.Set during the late 1970s, “The Opium Prince” is faithful to the historical events that rocked Afghanistan during the period. It’s also illustrative of the deep gap between the haves and the have-nots. And it provides a good example of what William Faulkner believed to be the goal of all authors and poets: to depict “the human heart in conflict with itself ... because only that is worth writing about, worth the agony and the sweat.”As Daniel Sajadi and his American wife, Rebecca, are driving out from Kabul on an anniversary trip, he accidently hits and kills a Kochi girl named Telaya. In a tense confrontation with her parents and other members of the Kochi people, he is let off with a nominal fine. This is in part because, as nomads, the life of a Kochi – especially a young girl – is seen by Afghan authorities as having little value. But it’s also because a mysterious stranger named Taj Maleki intervenes.Aimaq uses this confrontation to set up a contrapuntal narrative between the lives of Daniel and Taj. Daniel – the son of a deceased Afghan war hero and an American mother – is in Afghanistan as the head of a U.S. agency focused on eliminating the heroin-producing poppy fields. Taj, who began life as a nameless orphan, has become a wealthy opium khan whose very fields are the ones targeted by Daniel’s agency for destruction.The main substance of the story centers around Taj’s attempts to manipulate and profit from Daniel’s deep guilt over the accident. Add to this a troubled marriage, jealousy over real or imagined past affairs, and an unflinching look at all the strata of Afghan society and you have a story that holds the reader’s attention.International politics are woven throughout the narrative. While one man is tasked with enforcing America’s war on drugs, another seeks to protect his opium-based income through blackmail and intimidation. Beneath the plot, Aimaq lays out a series of rhetorical questions: Is the war on drugs doomed to failure because so many people (like the nomadic Kochi) must produce them to earn an income? Do the chemicals used to eradicate the poppies cause lingering health problems? Can farmers really make a decent income by growing something other than opium poppies? Is the Western world hypocritical by trying to eliminate the drug, while at the same time being one of its key markets?Aimaq also has a keen grasp of social settings and the psychological interplay that takes place during conversations. At a party at the Sajadi’s, “Rebecca dropped a James Brown record on the turntable. The ambassador gave her a peck on the cheek. ‘How’s my fastest typist tonight?’ She hugged him halfheartedly, like he was a toy she had outgrown, and when she walked away, she curled her fingers into her palms.”Aimaq’s novel also chronicles the collapse of the Afghan government, from the assassination of President Mohammed Daoud Khan to the communist political party that replaced him in a coup. Against this real-life backdrop, the fates of the main protagonists play out almost in the tradition of classic Greek tragedy. Yet the end is not so formulaic; as the plot evolves, an unforeseen transformation takes place.Aimaq herself is Afghan-Swedish, and growing up in Afghanistan has allowed her to write about the people of that country with authority and clarity. Readers will come away with a deeper understanding of the land and its inhabitants, and will also have reason to anticipate her next literary effort.

43 - ‘Wild Minds’ explores the creative landscape of early animation
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/Book-Reviews/2021/0113/Wild-Minds-explores-the-creative-landscape-of-early-animation
Most people would identify Snow White, Grumpy, and Sleepy as cartoon characters, but it would have been a mistake to call them that within earshot of Walt Disney. Upon the release of his masterpiece “Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs” in 1937, Disney objected to a journalist describing his film as a “cartoon.” “It’s no more a cartoon,” Disney said, “than a painting by Whistler is a cartoon.”In an exhaustive and highly entertaining new book, journalist Reid Mitenbuler demonstrates that he shares Disney’s belief in the artistic value of animated works – though they are, too often, thought of as mere kids’ stuff.In “Wild Minds: The Artists and Rivalries That Inspired the Golden Age of Animation,” Mitenbuler goes wide and deep in surveying the talented, sometimes eccentric, and often irascible artists who developed, nurtured, and transformed the medium. Disney is among the book’s principal players, but to Mitenbuler’s credit, he never lets the big names completely dominate.Non-animation buffs: Raise your hand if you’ve heard of animator Albert Hurter, one of the Disney artists who worked on “Snow White.” Famous or not, Hurter is given his due by Mitenbuler, who describes him as a “tall, gaunt, mustachioed man” who clocked in at 8 a.m. and out at 5 p.m. But between those hours, he was a creative force. “Before every new film, Hurter would allow his imagination free rein, then pass his sketches to the animators for inspiration,” Mitenbuler writes. “For Snow White he drew fifty to one hundred sketches a day.”An early indicator of Mitenbuler’s masterful knowledge comes in the second chapter, where he dispels the widely held belief that Winsor McCay, best known as the writer-artist of the newspaper comic supplement “Little Nemo in Slumberland,” was the originator of the art of animation. Although McCay made hugely important contributions to the medium, including “Gertie the Dinosaur” in 1914, Mitenbuler notes that the first example of modern animated film seems to actually have been James Stuart Blackton’s “Humorous Phases of Funny Faces.” With a release date of 1906, it bests McCay’s earliest effort (an animated “Little Nemo”) by five years.But Mitenbuler also identifies humanity’s seemingly instinctive desire to make drawings come to life throughout history, speculating that people once used flickering torches to suggest movement in cave drawings. Other antecedents to “Funny Faces” include everything from the shadow puppets of the Tang dynasty of China to the zoetrope invented in England in the 19th century.The book follows animation’s evolution from a novelty to a bona fide industry. For example, Max Fleischer – who, along with his sibling Dave, are among the most creative filmmakers to ever work in the field – is accorded credit for coming up with the technique of rotoscoping. The technique, in which live-action photography is captured and then traced by animators, was a significant development that gave cartoons a patina of smoothness and professionalism.Yet “Wild Minds” never gets bogged down in technical details. Mitenbuler keeps his eye on the ball, detailing the origin stories of a swath of beloved cartoon creations, from Betty Boop to Bugs Bunny. A gifted cultural historian, Mitenbuler devotes an entire chapter to an improbable court case in which a singer named Helen Kane claimed to have been the uncredited source of inspiration for Betty Boop, a trial in which the phrase “boop-boop-a-doop” became a major issue.Without ignoring the horrid working conditions in which early animation staffs labored – one employee of the Fleischers was said to have become seriously ill and then died because of the dingy conditions at the studio – or the racist and sexist attitudes that were sadly prevalent, Mitenbuler praises the surprising degree of sophistication present in the major animated works of the period.The rather ordinary title of the Fleischers’ “Betty Boop in Snow-White” (1933) does not begin to describe its surreal sights and soundtrack (including Cab Calloway performing “St. James Infirmary Blues”), and the brothers’ “Popeye” cartoons are, rather amazingly, said to have inspired the Abraham Lincoln Brigade in the Spanish Civil War. The brigade, Mitenbuler writes, “even adapted Popeye’s theme song into a battle cry, fitting new words to the familiar ‘I’m Popeye the Sailor Man!’”Disney may look milquetoast next to the freewheeling spirit of the Fleischers. But while the legendary animation king’s aims were certainly more conservative, he broke tremendous amounts of ground in other areas. A fortune was poured into Disney’s “Snow White,” which, upon its release, was praised by Russian filmmaker Sergei Eisenstein as the greatest film, animated or otherwise, produced to that point.The book also surveys the proudly anarchic animated efforts at Warner Bros., which included modeling Daffy Duck’s signature lisp on that of an unpopular studio executive, as well as the sleek, stylish offerings of United Productions of America (UPA), which sought to be the antithesis of both the sentimental Disney and the raucous Warner Bros. crew.Whatever an animation fan’s taste, Mitenbuler’s book provides fascinating stories and nuggets. For the uninitiated, it certainly can aid in the formation of viewing lists to keep both children and adults occupied while riding out the pandemic.

44 - Forced into camps, Japanese Americans found respite in football
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/Book-Reviews/2021/0113/Forced-into-camps-Japanese-Americans-found-respite-in-football
The football team wore white and gold, athletic tape held up their pants, and cardboard covered their legs instead of thigh pads. They were not outfitted for victory, but then again, they were playing inside a concentration camp. In “The Eagles of Heart Mountain: A True Story of Football, Incarceration, and Resistance in World War II America,” Bradford Pearson tells the history of the imprisonment of 120,000 Japanese-American people beginning in 1942.The period of confinement for Japanese American citizens has known different names in the 80 years since Executive Order 9066 – which gave military commanders the authority to remove persons of Japanese ancestry from their West Coast homes – was signed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Words like “internment” and “relocation” have been employed to describe this mass removal with distinctly racial motivations, but Pearson uses “incarceration” in line with the recommendations of the nonprofit historical organization Densho.Japanese immigrants and their American children were already regarded with racist suspicion in the years leading up to the war. But in the wake of the 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor by the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service, those tensions bubbled over into outright hostility. Unfounded fears of Japanese American citizens taking up arms for Japan, though many were second- or third-generation Americans, were used to justify their removal. No such order was levied against Italian Americans or German Americans.The camps to which Japanese American people were sent during the war years were constructed on government lands that were unsuitable for farming – areas that were “passed over by even the most desperate of pioneers.” Heart Mountain in Wyoming, just north of Cody, was one such place. Brutal summers and winters, intense winds, and rattlesnakes made life difficult for the inhabitants of Heart Mountain Relocation Center, but residents did their best to live normal lives, including playing good old American football.Without much time to do so, residents threw together a high school team: the Heart Mountain Eagles. Only a few of the team members had football experience, and the rest had less than two weeks to learn ahead of their first game. Yet their determination and sheer speed – not to mention the natural talent of quarterback Tamotsu “Babe” Nomura – helped the scrappy team achieve victory. They eventually became red hot and won nearly every game they could arrange; a few teams from nearby high schools even declined to face them, likely afraid of a rout.Although the Heart Mountain Eagles are at the figurative center of this book, sports fans seeking football history will find themselves searching for even the mention of a ball within the first half. Contrary to what the title implies, the football team is a secondary focus. However, when the sports writing does pop up, it is nothing short of glorious.“Arms pumping as the dust kicked up beneath him, he was gone. Gone from that field, gone from camp, gone from Wyoming.” writes Pearson, describing a play by Nomura. “Replace all the bad with all the good and for those seconds he can be just a boy doing what he loves most.” Using meticulous research and a whole lot of heart, Pearson gives a devastatingly powerful history of Japanese American internment and demonstrates its absurdity with the tale of an undeniably all-American football team. These young men were the epitome of what it means to be an American: They were hard-working children of immigrants, pushing themselves to be the best they could be for themselves and their families. The fact that they named their team after that most American symbol – the eagle – is the period at the end of the sentence. Though there is not as much football as the title seems to promise, this is an inspired and necessary work of history.

45 - ‘Yellow Wife’ takes a hard look at choices faced by enslaved mothers
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/Book-Reviews/2021/0113/Yellow-Wife-takes-a-hard-look-at-choices-faced-by-enslaved-mothers
In “Yellow Wife,” Sadeqa Johnson paints a world of rich details of the antebellum South. The story is told through the eyes of Pheby Brown, a biracial girl born to an enslaved mother and a white plantation owner. Because of her status, Pheby was sheltered as a child from much of the violence and harshness of slavery. She was taught to read, which was against the law, and to play the piano. While she lives in relative privilege for being enslaved, she knows that there is a world of freedom beyond Charles City, Virginia, and she wants it. Pheby dreams about a life in which she is no longer enslaved, based on a promise made by her father, Jacob, to free her when she turns 18. Her love, Essex, another enslaved person, decides to make a run North to freedom, and he implores Pheby to go with him. But she hangs onto the promise of emancipation, and then learns the hard way that not all promises come true. After her owner/father is seriously injured in a carriage accident, his wife – who has always been jealous of Pheby and her mother – sells Pheby off the plantation. Her new owner, Rubin Lapier, is the proprietor of the Jail, a holding facility for slaves in Richmond. He coerces her into a sexual relationship, and she bears his children and acts as the lady of his house. Years later, she’s reunited with Essex when he is captured and brought to the Jail; Pheby must plot to help him escape.Johnson’s portrayal of privilege and a class system among slaves is particularly striking. It isn’t news that children fathered by a slave owner often garnered more favor in the plantation hierarchy, usually because of the color of their skin. At the end of the day, they were all still enslaved with no path to freedom. But Johnson, in showing Pheby’s early life, underscores the tragic change in circumstances that Pheby must learn to navigate.“The Yellow Wife” doesn’t sugarcoat the realities of slavery. There is no romanticization of the relationship between enslaved persons and their owners, though that trope has been perpetuated in many novels. (It has even clouded the popular understanding of the relationship between slaveowner President Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings, the enslaved woman who was the mother of several of his children.)Instead, “Yellow Wife” is unflinching in its descriptions of the violence, inhumanity, and family separations that Black women living in slavery faced, as well as the choices they made to keep their children alive. Johnson has no interest in softening the story to make it more palatable. As Americans continue to deal with issues of race today, “Yellow Wife” is the perfect book to help the country see, in part, how it got here.

46 - ‘Concrete Rose’ is another winner from ‘The Hate U Give’ author
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/Book-Reviews/2021/0112/Concrete-Rose-is-another-winner-from-The-Hate-U-Give-author
A couplet from Tupac Shakur’s poem, “The Rose that Grew from Concrete,” inspired the title of bestselling novelist Angie Thomas’ latest book, “Concrete Rose”: “Did you hear about the rose that grew from a crack in the concrete? / Proving nature’s laws wrong it learned how to walk without having feet.”Fans of Thomas may be familiar with her affinity for the rapper; her 2017 debut novel “The Hate U Give” also alluded to his work. They will likely also remember the rose in question: Maverick Carter, who was introduced in “The Hate U Give” as the responsible, nurturing father to teenage protagonist Starr Carter.In this prequel set in the 1990s, a teenage Maverick takes center stage as he’s caught in a snarl of misfortune and poor choices while he figures out his place in the world. He’s a junior member of the King Lords gang, but that’s the least of his worries. In fact, he thinks of it as “like a fraternity” because his uncles, his father, and their cousins all joined before him. Given Maverick’s family ties, his membership is almost necessary to survive in Garden Heights – a close-knit neighborhood that becomes easy to visualize, thanks to Thomas’ world-building skills.“No mother want their son in a gang, but no mother want their son dead either. Pops made so many enemies in the streets that I need somebody to have my back,” Maverick explains.Instead, he’s anxiously waiting the results of a DNA test, which will determine whether or not he  fathered a baby in a one-night stand he had when he was temporarily unattached to his current beloved girlfriend. He’s also running a dangerous side gig dealing drugs, despite promising his mother he’d avoid the riskier and deadlier side of gang life. This 17-year-old version of Maverick is the most flawed hero that Thomas has written so far. Earlier principals Brianna Jackson (from “On the Come Up,” Thomas’ second book) and Starr had to navigate life as Black teens in communities facing poverty and gang conflicts, but Starr was a straight-arrow private school student and Bri was a talented rapper. One of Thomas’ standout talents is her ability to show readers of all backgrounds that Maverick, despite his imperfections and struggles, is also more blossom than thorns. He’s intent on doing the right thing, even though it takes a lot of growth to figure out what that truly means.“Concrete Rose” is briskly written in Thomas’ unmistakable style, which is breezy but scattered with piercing insights and wry humor. The book is recommended for ages 14 and up; there is plenty of cursing and a brief but vivid murder scene that carries significant aftershocks, as well as a description of a sexual encounter that has ramifications of its own.More unusual for a Young Adult novel is Thomas’ loving, true-to-life, and sometimes hilarious account of what’s involved in parenting an infant. Maverick learns about diapering, sleep routines, physician co-pays, postpartum depression, and car seat safety, all while trying to earn an honest living in a society whose cruel calculus suggests honesty is impractical. Maverick’s struggle to incorporate his own parents’ lessons into his decisions are particularly moving, as is his love and care for the baby he names Seven.“Seven is the number of perfection. He perfect, ain’t he?” Maverick says.“Concrete Rose” stands alone as a novel, but makes for an extra-satisfying matched pair with “The Hate U Give.” Knowing how Maverick’s story ends removes some of the tension; readers know who he will marry, what career he’ll pursue, and what kind of man he’ll be. But that knowledge also provides opportunities to savor the book’s relationships, delight in deeper understanding of the major and minor characters, and focus on the front-row view of Garden Heights. And Thomas urges readers to recognize the roses growing in the concrete of their own communities – or the ones they might themselves be.For those who read “Concrete Rose” after finishing “The Hate U Give,” there’s a layer of added poignancy to what Maverick discovers is owed to his parents and his children – and ultimately to himself. Longtime fans know that more hard times and tough decisions lie ahead for him, even past the hard-won happy ending in “Concrete Rose.” Still, that doesn’t spoil the pleasure of this very satisfying read.
