CSM Articles
1 - In the midst of vaccines, how one UK church offers a spot of joy
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/2021/0121/In-the-midst-of-vaccines-how-one-UK-church-offers-a-spot-of-joy
David Halls isn’t a doctor, nurse, or ambulance driver, but he wanted to contribute in the fight against COVID-19. So he did what he does best: He sat down on the bench beside at Salisbury Cathedral’s historic organ and began to play.Mr. Halls is one of the many people who have turned the 800-year-old cathedral in southwestern England into a mass vaccination center as the U.K. races to inoculate 50 million people. His contribution to the effort is offering a bit of Bach, Handel, and even a little Rodgers & Hammerstein to the public as they shuffle through the nave to get their shots.“At times of crisis, people come together and want to listen to music; at moments of joy, people want to listen to music,’’ Mr. Halls, the cathedral’s music director, told The Associated Press. “And so I don’t think it’s any surprise the effect of soothing music on people who probably are feeling quite stressed for various reasons.”Salisbury Cathedral, home to one of the best preserved copies of the Magna Carta and England’s tallest church spire, has been enlisted as a vaccination center as the government expands its shot program to soccer stadiums, convention centers, and hundreds of local doctors offices to speed delivery.Hundreds of elderly residents have rolled up their sleeves and got their shots in the great nave, which is big enough to gather people together while also keeping them safely apart.It’s in stark contrast to 1627, when church leaders locked the cathedral gates to keep townspeople out as plague swept through Salisbury. Canon Nicholas Papadopulos, dean of the cathedral, says he reflected on that episode with “visceral discomfort” last year when he celebrated the building’s 800th anniversary.Now, it’s time for a new chapter.“If these stones could speak, they would talk about moments of incredible joy and moments of incredible sadness,” Mr. Halls said. “It feels thoroughly appropriate that the cathedral is playing its part in trying to turn things around and to be part of the vaccinations ... To be part of that is such a privilege, such an honor.”The United Kingdom plans to offer a first dose of vaccine to more than 15 million people by mid-February as it targets the country’s oldest and most vulnerable residents in the program’s first phase. Progressively younger groups of people will follow suit, with the government planning to reach everyone over 18 by September.The need is urgent. Britain’s healthcare system is staggering as doctors and nurses battle a more contagious variant of COVID-19.While new infections appear to have peaked, the number of people hospitalized is still rising. More than 39,000 patients are being treated in U.K. hospitals, 80% more than during the first peak of the pandemic last April. Britain has reported 93,463 coronavirus-related deaths, more than any other country in Europe and the fifth-highest toll worldwide.The effort at the cathedral is a community one, involving many. Organists took turns of two hours playing the massive “Father Willis’’ – making sure to sanitize in between.John Challenger, Salisbury’s assistant director of music, said many getting the shots are older people who are isolated and haven’t been able to hear live music for months.In addition to playing soothing music, Challenger used his time at the organ to entertain and spark memories by playing songs like Mendelssohn’s “Wedding March.” “And in the more frivolous moments, I played ‘I Do Like to Be Beside the Seaside,’ because, you know, we all want to go on holiday and haven’t been able to go where we want,” he said.Among those listening Wednesday was Sylvia Parkin who came with her husband, David. They have had to stay home a lot for the past 10 months, which has been no fun.“It’s a trip out today, isn’t it?” she said cheerfully. “It’s a wonderful place to have an injection.”And while it may be a long way up to the organ loft, people have managed to get their requests in.Mr. Halls played Handel’s “Largo” and Bach’s “Jesu, Joy of Man’s Desiring” for an elderly neighbor who had sent an email asking for his favorites to be played precisely at 10:45 a.m. during his appointment.As Mr. Halls finished, he glanced at the screen that shows the organist what’s happening on the floor below and saw his neighbor frantically waving – windshield wiper style – and offering his thanks.“He emailed me later and he said that was the best part of his entire life other than his wedding day,” Halls said. “I think to come second to that is quite good, actually.”This story was reported by the Associated Press. Kearney contributed from Salisbury, England. Editor’s note: As a public service, the Monitor has removed the paywall for all our coronavirus coverage. It’s free.

2 - COVID-19 versus Brexit: Pandemic wins by a knockout
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/Europe/2021/0121/COVID-19-versus-Brexit-Pandemic-wins-by-a-knockout
Three weeks into its post-Brexit existence, the United Kingdom isn’t experiencing the sort of new world that “leave” supporters were expecting. Nor one that the “remain” side anticipated, either.The endless political debate that had consumed society may finally be over. Take a walk around any British street and you’d be hard-pressed to find the quirky placards that had adorned bedroom windows immediately after the 2016 Brexit referendum. And the protesters clad in Union Jack blazers or EU colored hats jostling for attention outside Parliament are no longer to be found.But instead of being rampant at the moment that it became real, Brexit has largely fallen from public attention. With the pandemic ravaging the U.K., most Britons are more concerned with lockdowns and social distancing than their country’s new geopolitical status. And even were the pandemic not a factor, the public still remains firmly divided over Brexit, with the new trade deal’s implications only starting to emerge.“It’ll take a long time before anyone is able to come to a really objective assessment on what Brexit really means for the U.K.,” says Patrick Diamond, former head of policy at 10 Downing Street. “The disruptive effect of the pandemic has been so enormous. It’ll be several years before an objective understanding is possible.”“Wall to wall COVID”Britain’s bandwidth for Brexit talk has faded rapidly with broadcasters, newsstands, and politicians focused on a pandemic that has left the U.K. with the highest daily per capita death rate in the world.“Since the deal was concluded, it’s been wall-to-wall COVID. The mood is oddly non-political at the moment,” says Mr. Diamond, now a politics lecturer at Queen Mary University of London. With the Brexit deal rapidly enacted at the end of the year, it “created a national sigh of relief, with people thinking ... ‘OK, we’ve got a basic deal in place. It wasn’t a disaster and some continuity is now possible.’”Brexit opponents like Mike Buckley, director of the campaign group Labour for a European Future, say the muted response is down to public exhaustion. He argues that a trifecta of being “brow-beaten by the government, who want everybody to move on,” media which have “never reported Brexit well,” and ineffective political opposition that has “ill served the public” have all lowered the volume on Brexit.Certainly, COVID-19 is responsible for drawing away the public’s attention. Almost three-quarters of Britons say the pandemic is the most important issue on their minds, according to an Ipsos Mori poll. With the public staying at home and unable to interact under lockdown restrictions, Brexit has fallen down the pecking order for Britons consumed by the impact of COVID-19 on daily life, says Keiran Pedley, Ipsos Mori research director.As for how people feel about Brexit, little has changed and the mood remains divided. Political opinions have entrenched in the four-and-a-half years since the 2016 Brexit referendum took place, Mr. Pedley says.According to an early January poll by Ipsos Mori, 45% of Britons think Brexit has had a negative impact on the country, figures that are relatively unchanged over the last year. Only 28% think Brexit has had a positive impact on the country – up a point from June, but down 5 points from January last year, while 17% say it has made no difference and 10% don’t know.“When you look at those numbers it sums up Brexit quite nicely, because you can interpret it in two different ways. You can say the public are more negative than positive, which is true,” or that just as many people think the breakaway is positive or neutral as think it’s a bad thing.Seeking opportunity through uncertaintyStill, there are signs that the reality of the Brexit deal – and some of its costs, not all expected – is starting to set in. “Trade barriers, food shortages in Northern Ireland … and Scottish fishermen having to throw away rotting food” because new bureaucratic delays have made it unsaleable, says Mr. Buckley, the Labour group director. “Facts are now cutting through,” he adds.Britain’s fishing industry, long a vocal advocate of Brexit, has rapidly shifted its tone toward the new state of affairs after the new trade deal’s border controls pushed small British fish exporters to the brink of ruin. “Throughout the fishing industry there is a profound sense of disillusionment, betrayal, and fury that after all the rhetoric, promises, and assurances, the Government caved-in on fish,” says Barrie Deas, chief executive of the National Federation of Fisherman’s Organisations, which represents Britain’s fishers. On Monday, more than 20 shellfish trucks parked on roads near the British parliament and Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s residence in protest over post-Brexit bureaucracy.There has also been disappointment that Britain has pulled out of the European university exchange scheme, ERASMUS. One of the most popular EU programs, ERASMUS has given hundreds of thousands of British students a chance to discover unfamiliar cultures and study foreign languages.The decision to abandon the scheme was described by Nicola Sturgeon, first minister of Scotland, as “cultural vandalism.”Much of the logistical detail around the trade deal remains murky, which is causing problems for small business owners. Abhilash Jobanputra and Gabriel Ungur left their banking jobs to set up a stall selling freshly brewed Indian chai in London two years ago. Unable to get basic cardboard packaging from Europe hinders their deliveries, the entrepreneurs say, and Brexit has “created a depressed mindset” among their fellow British startups.“The inability to really plan ahead, and have some kind of idea of what the world will look like even with a trade deal, is a struggle,” says Mr. Unger. “But we’re trying to see opportunity amongst the uncertainty.”

3 - Baghdad hit by suicide bombings for first time in three years
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/Middle-East/2021/0121/Baghdad-hit-by-suicide-bombings-for-first-time-in-three-years
Twin suicide bombings ripped through a busy market in the Iraqi capital Thursday, killing at least 32 people and wounding dozens, officials said.The rare suicide bombing hit the Bab al-Sharqi commercial area in central Baghdad amid heightened political tensions over planned early elections and a severe economic crisis.No one immediately took responsibility for the attack, but Iraqi military officials said it was the work of the Islamic State group.Iraq’s health minister Hassan Mohammed al-Tamimi said at least 32 people were killed and 110 were wounded in the attack. He said some of the wounded were in serious condition. Iraq’s military previously put the number of dead at 28.The Health Ministry announced that all of its hospitals in the capital were mobilized to treat the wounded.Maj. Gen. Tahsin al-Khafaji, spokesman for the Joint Operations Command, which includes an array of Iraqi forces, said the first suicide bomber cried out loudly that he was ill in the middle of the bustling market, prompting a crowd to gather around him – and that’s when he detonated his explosive belt. The second detonated his belt shortly after, he said.“This is a terrorist act perpetrated by a sleeper cell of the Islamic State,” Mr. Khafaji said. He said IS “wanted to prove its existence” after suffering many blows in military operations to root out the militants.At the Vatican, Pope Francis denounced the attack in Baghdad as a “senseless act of brutality” and urged Iraqis to keep working to replace violence with fraternity and peace. The telegram of condolences sent to the Iraqi president was particularly heartfelt, given the pope is due to visit Iraq in early March to try to encourage the country’s Christian communities that have been devastated by IS persecution.Thursday’s twin suicide bombings marked the first in three years to target Baghdad’s bustling commercial area. A suicide bomb attack took place in the same area in 2018 shortly after then-Prime Minister Haidar al-Abadi declared victory over the Islamic State group, a Sunni militant group.Iraq has seen assaults perpetrated by both the Islamic State group and mostly Shiite militia groups in recent months. Militias have routinely targeted the American presence in Iraq with rocket and mortar attacks, especially the United States Embassy in Baghdad’s heavily fortified Green Zone. The pace of those attacks, however, has decreased since an informal truce was declared by Iran-backed armed groups in October.The style of Thursday’s assault was similar to those IS has conducted in the past. But the group has rarely been able to penetrate the capital since being dislodged by Iraqi forces and the U.S.-led coalition in 2017.IS has shown an ability to stage increasingly sophisticated attacks across northern Iraq, where it still maintains a presence, three years after Iraq declared victory over the group.Iraqi security forces are frequently ambushed and targeted with IEDs in rural areas of Kirkuk and Diyala. An increase in attacks was seen last summer as militants took advantage of the government’s focus on tackling the coronavirus pandemic.The twin bombings Thursday came days after Iraq’s government unanimously agreed to hold early elections in October. Prime Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi had announced in July that early polls would be held to meet the demands of anti-government protesters.Demonstrators took to the streets in the tens of thousands last year to demand political change, and an end to rampant corruption and poor services. More than 500 people were killed in mass demonstrations as security forces used live rounds and tear gas to disperse crowds.Iraq is also grappling with a severe economic crisis brought on by low oil prices that has led the government to borrow internally and risk depleting its foreign currency reserves. The Central Bank of Iraq devalued Iraq’s dinar by nearly 20% last year to meet spending obligations.This story was reported by The Associated Press. AP writer Murtada Faraj in Baghdad contributed to this report.

4 - The next climate change challenge: Matching words with action
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/2021/0121/The-next-climate-change-challenge-Matching-words-with-action
We’re just days into January, but the signs are already clear: 2021 is shaping up as a make-or-break year in the fight to curb climate change.Very few world leaders now doubt the scale of the problem. They have vivid memories of last year’s record heat waves, ice melts, wildfires, and hurricanes, and now they have new scientific reports that global warming is still gathering pace.The world’s key economic powers – the European Union, China, and the United States under the new Biden administration – have all announced more ambitious goals to limit reliance on the fossil fuels that do the most climate damage. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has also made new clean energy pledges, with an eye toward a major international climate conference he will host in November.The make-or-break question is this: Will world leaders exhibit the political will to translate their words into action?Two litmus tests bear watching, with the likelihood we’ll have a far clearer answer in the coming months.One is political – whether, in the run-up to November’s conference, national governments will approach climate action not merely as a matter of importance but as a genuine emergency.The second is economic. It’s about “following the money.” In this case, the historically huge sums that governments around the globe are poised to spend on rebuilding their pandemic-damaged economies. A number of leading governments have pledged to “build back better,” emphasizing low-carbon projects, but how green will their priorities actually be?Both of these are distinctly 2021 challenges.The November conference, in the Scottish city of Glasgow, will come six years after the last major international step toward fighting global warming: the Paris climate agreement. The recently heightened focus on Glasgow has a lot to do with what’s happened since.In Paris, every nation – including the world’s two worst carbon emitters, China and the United States – pledged to take measures to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions, with the goal of keeping global temperatures at most 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) higher than pre-Industrial Revolution levels, and preferably only 1.5 degrees C higher.The deal was seen as a turning point at the time, even though many scientists worried that the pledges were not ambitious enough to avert catastrophe by the end of this century. But over the past five years, not only have the signatories’ national commitments proved insufficient to put a brake on global warming, but the U.S. announced it was pulling out of the treaty.  According to data published in recent days, 2020 and 2016 were the hottest years since the first reliable records over a century ago. Most record-hot years have now been registered this century, and the new data also confirmed another milestone: The global temperature increase since the 1800s now stands at 1.2 C, not far below the limit aspired to in Paris.Last month, the United Nations projected that figure would reach 3.2 degrees C by the end of the century unless countries did far more to address climate change.And it’s not just the numbers. The last 12 months have seen unprecedented wildfires raging through the western U.S., Australia, and northern Siberia; extremes of drought and record downpours have hit Africa and Asia, and more hurricanes and tropical storms than ever before battered the Americas. They have done billions of dollars of economic damage and taken countless lives.Prime Minister Johnson has a huge political incentive to make Glasgow a success. Having led Britain out of the EU, he sees his role as chair of the climate conference as a chance to display his country’s undiminished influence on the world stage.He will have been encouraged by Mr. Biden’s decision to reverse President Donald Trump’s withdrawal from the Paris accord as one of his first acts in office. Indeed, the British leader reacted with a tweet calling it “hugely positive news,” adding that he looked forward “to working with our U.S. partners to do all we can to safeguard our planet.”But the question is how far the U.S. and other governments will go in Glasgow. Most climate scientists say they must set 1.5 degrees C as a firm target for temperature rises and give their steps toward that goal the force of binding legal commitments rather than the voluntary pledges agreed in Paris.The second litmus test – the economic one – will also be telling.Here, there have been encouraging early signs. The EU last year agreed to earmark nearly one-third of a roughly $900 billion pandemic-recovery fund for low-carbon projects. According to an analysis late last year by Britain’s Guardian newspaper, France, Germany, and Spain, as well as Britain, have unveiled recovery plans that will indeed yield a net reduction in carbon emissions.The big potential game changer, however, is the U.S. During the presidential election campaign, Joe Biden laid out a historically large plan, worth nearly $2 trillion, for low-carbon energy infrastructure and other green initiatives over four years, though the final shape and size of the package may depend on the new president’s ability to win bipartisan support in Congress.But not everyone is being so ambitious. Canada has earmarked only 2% of its COVID-19 recovery package for low-carbon projects, South Korea is investing heavily on carbon-intensive industries to pull itself out of the economic slump, and the Indian government has been reluctant to end subsidies for coal producers.China, responsible for 80% of the growth in world carbon emissions over the past 20 years, will be key not just to the success of the Glasgow summit but to the overall battle against climate change. Its economy has pretty much recovered from the pandemic, and last year leader Xi Jinping unveiled a dramatic pledge to make China carbon-neutral by 2060. As yet, however, China has devoted just a tiny sliver of pandemic-recovery investments to low-carbon initiatives.The real measure of its commitment should be apparent in the final shape of its new five-year plan, prioritizing investment plans across the economy, which comes into force in March.In Beijing – as in Washington, Ottawa, Brussels, and Glasgow, where the world will gather this fall – it will be a case of not just what leaders say about climate change, but what they do.

5 - For the French, distrust of vaccines predates COVID-19
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/World/Europe/2021/0120/For-the-French-distrust-of-vaccines-predates-COVID-19
The longer Margot Morin sat at the University Hospital in Reims waiting for the COVID-19 jab, the more doubt crept in. A colleague next to her had a brief negative reaction to the vaccine, her blood pressure climbing and her fingers tingling.“I thought, ‘Oh là là, I’m next,’” says Ms. Morin, who is a physical therapy aide in her 50s and recently qualified to get the vaccine. “I was very skeptical. The hospital asked me if I wanted to get it and I took the day to think about it. There’s so much we still don’t know about the long-term effects.”But Ms. Morin has worked with numerous patients who later tested positive for COVID-19. Her husband is 10 years older and her parents are in their 90s. She ultimately decided to get the vaccine to protect those around her.“I definitely had doubts before getting it, and still do,” says Ms. Morin. “But if we want to get out of this pandemic, people need to make a decision.”Anti-vaccine sentiment in France is at one of the highest rates in the world. A 2018 Gallup-Wellcome Trust survey of more than 140 countries showed that France had the lowest level of trust in vaccines, with a third disagreeing that they were safe.The pandemic has only served to highlight the phenomenon. A 15-country survey conducted by Ipsos and the World Economic Forum at the end of December showed that France had the lowest rate of intent to receive the COVID-19 vaccine of those polled, at 40%, compared with China’s 80%. Between 2% and 10% of French people are considered die-hard anti-vaccination while experts put those who are “vaccine hesitant” between 25% and 70%.Behind the reticence are previous public health scandals involving both vaccines and medications, which have eroded public trust in political and scientific institutions. And a tendency toward skepticism and discomfort with change, considered distinctive French traits, have made the vaccine rollout here challenging.“We need to differentiate between French people who are anti-vaccination and vaccine hesitant,” says Patrick Peretti-Watel, a sociologist of public health and risk management at the French National Institute for Medical Research (INSERM).“Those who are hesitant are not necessarily for or against, but demand reflection. It’s quite healthy in this situation where we don’t have all the answers. But we need to gain people’s confidence and teach them that until we vaccinate everyone, and think in terms of the good of the group and not the individual, we can’t have a better daily life.”Hesitancy and hostility toward vaccinesGaining public trust in mass vaccination campaigns is a hard sell in France. After an upsurge in cases of multiple sclerosis in the 1990s, many blamed the countrywide vaccine campaign against hepatitis B a decade earlier – even if a scientific link between the two was never formally drawn.In 2009, Mediator, a weight-loss pill prescribed to diabetics, was taken off the market after revelations that it may have contributed to the death of up to 2,000 people. And in January 2010, the French government was forced to cancel 50 million doses of the swine flu vaccine after it found itself with an oversupply, costing hundreds of millions of euros.Vaccine hesitancy and refusal have also been fueled by France’s extreme political and medical voices. Far-right leader Marine Le Pen and far-left leader Jean-Luc Mélenchon have both publicly stated that they were hesitant about the COVID-19 jab, preferring to wait for more “traditional” methods.And the controversial doctor Didier Raoult, who has pushed the use of hydroxychloroquine to treat COVID-19 and is often featured in the mainstream press, has been a loudspeaker for the anti-vaccine movement.“I have never been scared of getting COVID,” says Marie Werbregue, president of the nonprofit Info Vaccins France. Ms. Werbregue is against vaccines in general and the COVID-19 shot in particular, and says vaccines played a role in her daughter developing autism. “What bothers me is having my personal liberties taken away like this.”The current vaccination effort wasn’t helped when, early in the pandemic, the French government discouraged anyone other than sick people or front-line medical workers from wearing masks. It was later revealed that the request was made because the national mask stockpile was too low to supply the public, who felt lied to by the government according to polls.“There is a real correlation between vaccine refusal, and resistance against political and scientific institutions,” says Antoine Bristielle, a political scientist at the Foundation Jean-Jaurès think tank. He says that trust in such institutions had been dropping even before the pandemic, but scientific institutions have seen a staggering fall – from 90% to 70% – since the pandemic began.“There is a section of the population that can still be convinced, that aren’t 100% resistant to the idea of the vaccine,” says Mr. Bristielle. “But they demand transparency in terms of the potential side effects and the risk of financial collusion between the government and pharmaceutical companies.”“I understand the reticence”France has had one of the slowest vaccine rollouts, compared with countries that have begun inoculations. As of Jan. 19, France had vaccinated just under 600,000 people, while in neighboring Germany more than 1 million have been inoculated. The United Kingdom has administered a first dose to over 4 million.France’s sluggish vaccine campaign, combined with growing fears of the British and South African variants of the virus, are slowly pushing the French toward vaccine acceptance. In a poll last week, 56% now say they intend to get vaccinated.One social media campaign has been trying to shore up public trust even before the current pandemic. The Facebook group Les Vaxxeuses has been publicizing the importance of vaccines and the dangers of fake news since 2017.“We teach people to verify the information they receive, offer links that explain things, or how to question the balance between benefit and risk,” says Pierre, a member of Les Vaxxeuses who does not reveal his name to the media after receiving death threats for his work. “It’s pretty hard to budge those who are totally anti-vaccine. But those who are hesitant? That’s where it can work.”Pierre says French people are naturally resistant to change, but that people will come around as more and more get the inoculation, producing a snowball effect – especially if France can kick-start its vaccine campaign and catch up with its European neighbors.Patrice Morin, Margot’s husband, says that seeing his wife get the vaccine and leave with just some slight arm soreness has helped assuage his doubts. Now retired, he used to work as a nurse and received one of the first, now infamous, hepatitis B vaccines.“It took a decade for that vaccine to be required for the general population, so I understand the reticence behind getting a vaccine that is so new,” says Mr. Morin, who doesn’t yet qualify for the COVID-19 vaccine. “When they offer me the [COVID-19] vaccine, I’m going to say yes, but not without a bit of doubt in the back of my mind. I trust what doctors are saying, but when it comes to the long-term side effects, we just don’t know.”

6 - Can Biden translate plea for unity from rhetoric to reality?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/Politics/2021/0121/Can-Biden-translate-plea-for-unity-from-rhetoric-to-reality
“We must end this uncivil war that pits red against blue, rural versus urban, conservative versus liberal,” President Joe Biden implored from the Capitol steps Wednesday in his inaugural address. It was a sobering plea to a nation brought low by a raging pandemic, economic hardship, civil unrest, and long-building political dysfunction – punctuated just two weeks ago by a deadly incursion into that same building by fringe supporters of now-ex-President Donald Trump. Republican officials widely disavowed the Capitol attack, rooted in efforts to reverse Electoral College results for the 2020 election. Yet polls show that up to three-quarters of Republican voters still don’t believe President Biden was legitimately elected. Some political observers are even asking: Has the United States become ungovernable? President Biden, 50 years into his political career, is making the calculation of a lifetime that he can prove the naysayers wrong. And he’s asking Americans to do their part. “We can do this,” he said Wednesday, “if we open our souls instead of hardening our hearts, if we show a little tolerance and humility.” Biden allies argue that, in winning the election, the president won a mandate to take action and deliver results. “He believes with every fiber of his being that all Americans – Democrats, independents, Republicans – are looking for leaders who will work together, find common ground, and get the virus under control and get people back to work,” says Jack Markell, former governor of Delaware and a member of the president’s transition team on health care. Mr. Biden’s focus Thursday, his first full day in office, was the pandemic. He signed 10 executive orders aimed at expanding access to testing and vaccines, reopening schools, and getting people back to work. Masks will now be required on interstate planes, trains, and buses, and international travelers will have to quarantine upon arriving in the U.S. But executive action is one thing, used increasingly by presidents of both parties as a way to move fast. Working with an almost evenly divided Congress, necessary to fund the president’s ambitious plans, is another. Mr. Biden is hoping for quick approval of his $1.9 trillion COVID-19 relief package, which would supplement stimulus checks to American workers, fund vaccine production, and help state and local governments avoid laying off essential workers. Analysts see the plan as an effort to go big, knowing that some elements may get pared back.Party rifts, and some optimismPartisan battle lines are already taking shape, for example, around the proposed increase of the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour. Republicans say now is not the time to add new burdens to struggling businesses. But viewed more broadly, and perhaps against the odds, the start of the new administration remains a time of hope and opportunity, a new poll shows. In many ways, the differences between former President Trump and Mr. Biden could not be more stark. Mr. Trump won the presidency without ever having served in public office, while Mr. Biden has made public service his life’s work, including 36 years in the Senate and eight years as vice president. Time and again, he has shown a willingness to work across the aisle. Perhaps because of Mr. Biden’s history of working with Republicans, a majority of Americans are at least somewhat optimistic that he can restore civility and unity in the nation’s politics, according to a bipartisan Battleground Poll released last week by the Georgetown University Institute of Politics and Public Service.Some 92% of Americans want Mr. Biden and Congress to work together. And 63%, including 44% of Republicans, think they will be successful. In a Jan. 8 podcast, former GOP House Speaker Newt Gingrich argues that Democratic promises of bipartisanship are “baloney.” In their eyes, he says, all it means is that “conservatives surrender.” He points to the House plan to impeach Mr. Trump, which it did on Jan. 13, as evidence. What the former speaker didn’t know was that 10 Republicans would join all House Democrats in voting to impeach. Mr. Gingrich also doesn’t mention that, in fact, he and former Democratic President Bill Clinton worked effectively across the aisle in the 1990s to achieve welfare reform and a balanced budget. What’s more, says Ed Goeas, the Republican pollster on the Battleground Poll, “more than 90% of Americans want the president and Congress to solve problems relevant to their daily lives. But there’s a Catch-22: Republicans don’t trust Democrats to take a deep breath and move there, and vice versa. Independents don’t trust anyone.”“Start out assuming that there’s common ground”Celinda Lake, the Democrat on the Battleground Poll, argues that neither side has to compromise its principles to make achievements. “You start out assuming that there’s common ground and you look for it,” Ms. Lake says, pointing to the book she wrote in 2010 with former Trump adviser Kellyanne Conway. “Eighty percent of voters agree on 80% of things.” She dismisses Mr. Gingrich’s take as “old thinking” and “certainly not the approach the Biden-Harris team will take.”What’s indisputable is that the impending impeachment trial of Mr. Trump will complicate Mr. Biden’s efforts to effect his agenda at a time of multiple national crises. The president’s spokespeople insist they can “walk and chew gum at the same time”; Democrats say the effort to convict Mr. Trump for “incitement of insurrection” over his rallying cries ahead of the Jan. 6 assault on the Capitol is necessary. A conviction, though seen as unlikely, would prevent the former president from running for office again. “Joe Biden is in a unique position, but that’s why he was chosen for this moment – because of his long-standing relationships with Republicans, and because of his compassion,” says Christina Greer, a political scientist at Fordham University. She echoes concerns of some progressives that Mr. Biden will compromise with Republicans too much. “But he’s the closest thing we have to someone who is ready to work on Day One,” Professor Greer says, noting his experience as President Barack Obama’s vice president. When they took office in 2009, the nation was in the midst of a financial crisis. Mr. Biden oversaw implementation of the 2009 Recovery Act. “Biden is not a fool; he understands that this won’t be easy,” says David Redlawsk, a political scientist at the University of Delaware. “He also knows that he doesn’t need to reach out to everybody. He can reach out to the 65% or 70% of Americans who would be on his side on many of his policies.” The power of sunshineDon Ritchie, the former Senate historian, sees parallels with former President Ronald Reagan, who early in his career led the Screen Actors Guild in labor negotiations, and knew to declare total victory even if he only got half of what he wanted. Former President Jimmy Carter, on the other hand, thought that if he didn’t get 100% of what he asked for, he had failed, recalls Mr. Ritchie.Likewise, Mr. Biden shares Mr. Reagan’s sunny disposition, he says. The former president told of a loved book from childhood, “The Contest Between the Sun and the Wind,” a test of strength to see which can get a man to remove his coat. The wind tries to blow it off the man, but he only clutches it tighter. The sun warms the man until he takes it off. “Reagan got a lot done by being warm and sunny, and after the years of Richard Nixon and Jimmy Carter, both parties were happy to have a more genial president,” says Mr. Ritchie. He suspects the same will be true this time around.Staff writer Francine Kiefer contributed to this report. 

7 - Biden's No. 1 priority: Stop the spread of the coronavirus
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/Politics/2021/0121/Biden-s-No.-1-priority-Stop-the-spread-of-the-coronavirus
Deep in the deadliest coronavirus wave and facing worrisome new mutations, United States President Joe Biden will kick off his national COVID-19 strategy to ramp up vaccinations and testing, reopen schools and businesses, and increase the use of masks – including a requirement that Americans mask up for travel.Mr. Biden also will address inequities in hard-hit minority communities as he signs 10 pandemic-related executive orders on Thursday. Those orders are a first step, and specific details of many administration actions are still being spelled out.The new president has vowed to take far more aggressive measures to contain the virus than his predecessor, starting with stringent adherence to public health guidance. He faces steep obstacles, with the virus actively spreading in most states, slow progress on the vaccine rollout, and political uncertainty over whether congressional Republicans will help him pass a $1.9 trillion economic relief and COVID-19 response package.“We need to ask average Americans to do their part,” said Jeff Zients, the White House official directing the national response. “Defeating the virus requires a coordinated nationwide effort.”Biden officials say they’re hampered by lack of cooperation from the Trump administration during the transition. They say they don’t have a complete understanding of their predecessors’ actions on vaccine distribution. And they face a litany of complaints from states that say they are not getting enough vaccine even as they are being asked to vaccinate more categories of people.Mr. Biden acknowledged the urgency of the mission in his inaugural address. “We are entering what may well be the toughest and deadliest period of the virus,” he said before asking Americans to join him in a moment of silence in memory of the more than 400,000 people in the United States who have died from COVID-19.Mr. Biden’s top medical adviser on COVID-19, Dr. Anthony Fauci, also announced renewed U.S. support for the World Health Organization after the Trump administration had pulled out of the global body. Dr. Fauci said early Thursday that the U.S. will join the U.N. health agency’s efforts to bring vaccines, therapeutics, and diagnostics to people in need, whether in rich or poor countries, and will resume full funding and staffing support for WHO.The U.S. mask order for travel being implemented by Mr. Biden will apply to airports and planes, ships, intercity buses, trains, and public transportation. Travelers from abroad must furnish a negative COVID-19 test before departing for the U.S. and quarantine upon arrival. Mr. Biden has already mandated masks on federal property.Although airlines, Amtrak, and other transport providers now require masks, Mr. Biden’s order makes it a federal mandate, leaving little wiggle room for passengers tempted to argue about their rights. It marks a sharp break with the culture of the Trump administration, under which masks were optional, and Mr. Trump made a point of going maskless and hosting big gatherings of like-minded supporters. Science has shown that masks, properly worn, cut down on coronavirus transmission.Mr. Biden is also seeking to expand testing and vaccine availability, with the goal of 100 million shots in his first 100 days in office. Mr. Zients called Mr. Biden’s goal “ambitious and achievable.”The Democratic president has directed the Federal Emergency Management Agency to begin setting up vaccination centers, aiming to have 100 up and running in a month. He’s ordering the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to begin a program to make vaccines available through local pharmacies starting next month. And he’s mobilizing the Public Health Service to deploy to assist localities in vaccinations.There’s also support for states. Mr. Biden is ordering FEMA to reimburse states for the full cost of using their National Guards to set up vaccination centers. That includes the use of supplies and protective gear as well as personnel.But some independent experts say the administration should be setting a higher bar for itself than 100 million shots. During flu season, the U.S. is able to vaccinate about 3 million people a day, said Dr. Christopher Murray of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation in Seattle. “Given the number of people dying from COVID, we could and should do more – like what we’re able to do on seasonal flu,” he said.Mr. Zients said Mr. Biden will not follow through on a Trump administration plan to penalize states lagging in vaccination by shifting some of their allocation to more efficient states. “We are not looking to pit one state against another,” he said.Mr. Biden has set a goal of having most K-8 schools reopen in his first 100 days, and he’s ordering the departments of Education and Health and Human Services to provide clear guidance for reopening schools safely. States would also be able to tap FEMA’s Disaster Relief Fund to help them get schools back open.Getting schools and child care going will help to ease the drag on the U.S. economy, making it easier for parents to return to their jobs and restaurants to find lunch-time customers.But administration officials stressed that reopening schools safely depends on increased testing.To ramp up supplies, Mr. Biden is giving government agencies a green light to use a Cold War-era law called the Defense Production Act to direct manufacturing.“We do not have nearly enough testing capacity in this country,” Mr. Zients said. “We need the money in order to really ramp up testing, which is so important to reopen schools and businesses.”This means that efforts to reopen the economy will hinge on how quickly lawmakers act on the $1.9 trillion package proposed by Mr. Biden, which includes separate planks such as $1,400 in direct payments to people, a $15 minimum wage, and aid to state and local governments that some Republican lawmakers see as unnecessary for addressing the medical emergency. The Biden plan estimates that a national vaccination strategy with expanded testing requires $160 billion, and he wants another $170 billion to aid the reopening of schools and universities. The proposal also calls for major investment in scientific research to track new strains of the virus, amid concern that some mutations may spread more easily and also prove harder to treat.As part of his COVID-19 strategy, Mr. Biden will order the establishment of a COVID-19 Health Equity Task Force to ensure that minority and underserved communities are not left out of the government’s response. Blacks, Latinos, and Native Americans have borne a heavy burden of death and disease from the virus. Surveys have shown vaccine hesitancy is high among African Americans, a problem the administration plans to address through an education campaign.But Dr. Marcella Nunez-Smith, the top White House health adviser on minority communities, said she’s not convinced that race should be a factor in vaccination. Disparities seem to have more to do with risky jobs and other life circumstances.“It’s not inherent to race,” she said. “It’s from the exposures.”This story was reported by The Associated Press. AP writers Collin Binkley and Josh Boak contributed to this report.Editor’s note: As a public service, the Monitor has removed the paywall for all our coronavirus coverage. It’s free.

8 - With Trump gone, where will QAnon supporters go for inspiration?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/Politics/2021/0121/With-Trump-gone-where-will-QAnon-supporters-go-for-inspiration
For years, legions of QAnon conspiracy theory adherents encouraged one another to “trust the plan” as they waited for the day when former President Donald Trump would orchestrate mass arrests, military tribunals, and executions of his Satan-worshipping, child-sacrificing enemies.Keeping the faith wasn’t easy when Inauguration Day didn’t usher in “The Storm,” the apocalyptic reckoning that they have believed was coming for prominent Democrats and Mr. Trump’s “deep state” foes. QAnon followers grappled with anger, confusion, and disappointment Wednesday as President Joe Biden was sworn into office.Some believers found a way to twist the conspiracy theory’s convoluted narrative to fit their belief that Mr. Biden’s victory was an illusion and that Mr. Trump would secure a second term in office. Others clung to the notion that Mr. Trump will remain a “shadow president” during Mr. Biden’s term. Some even floated the idea that the inauguration ceremony was computer-generated or that Mr. Biden himself could be the mysterious “Q,” who is purportedly a government insider posting cryptic clues about the conspiracy.For many others, however, Mr. Trump’s departure sowed doubt.“I am so scared right now, I really feel nothing is going to happen now,” one poster wrote on a Telegram channel popular with QAnon believers. “I’m just devastated.”Mike Rothschild, author of a forthcoming book on QAnon called “The Storm is Upon Us,” said it’s too early to gauge whether the wave of disillusionment that swept through the QAnon ranks Wednesday is a turning point or a fleeting setback for the movement.“I think these people have given up too much and sacrificed too much in their families and in their personal lives,” he said. “They have believed this so completely that to simply walk away from it is just not in the realm of reality for most of these people.”On Wednesday, as it became obvious that Mr. Biden’s inauguration would proceed, many QAnon message boards and online groups were bombarded by hecklers and trolls making fun of the conspiracy. Some longtime QAnon posters said they planned to step away from social media, if only temporarily.“Trump has said, ‘THE BEST IS YET TO COME.’ I’m not giving up,” Telegram user Qtah wrote in an announcement to his 30,000 subscribers that he was taking a social media break.Some groups seized the moment to try to recruit disillusioned QAnon supporters to white supremacy and other far-right neofascist movements like the Proud Boys. On Wednesday, for example, an anonymous poster on 4chan posited in a thread that “this would be the perfect time to start posting Nat Soc propaganda in Q anon groups. Clearly, this is a very low point for Q believers, and once people have been broken, they will look for ways to cling back to hope again.” Nat Soc stands for national socialism, commonly referred to as Nazism.QAnon emerged in 2017 through anonymous, fringe online message boards before migrating to Twitter, Facebook, and other mainstream platforms that were slow to purge the conspiracy theory from their sites.Although Facebook and Twitter platforms vowed last year to rid their sites of QAnon, accounts with thousands of loyal followers remained until this month, when the tech companies finally disabled thousands of users who used violent rhetoric to encourage protests of the election results in Washington on Jan. 6. The ensuing mob attack on the Capitol resulted in multiple deaths and a ransacking of the building.Twitter announced it had suspended more than 70,000 QAnon accounts in the days following the attack. Facebook, meanwhile disbanded more than 57,000 pages, groups, Facebook profiles, and Instagram accounts this month. Mr. Trump also was barred from using his Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube accounts.The crackdown sent some of the conspiracy theory’s most ardent promoters fleeing to less populated social media sites like MeWe and the Telegram messaging app, where they quickly raked in thousands of followers.But the social media companies’ suspensions paralyzed QAnon chatter on the sites, with mentions of popular QAnon hashtags like #FightforTrump and #HoldTheLine declined by roughly 90%, according to an analysis by media intelligence firm Zignal Labs.Other QAnon believers still found ways to promote their message on Facebook and Twitter, urging followers to hold out hope that Mr. Trump would find a way to stay in office or expose the “deep state” network of government leaders who they believe operate a child sex trafficking ring.Videos and posts on Facebook, Telegram, and YouTube predicted Mr. Trump would take over the emergency broadcast system to declare martial law and arrest prominent Democrats.“This presidential inauguration that we’re going to see coming up ... I’m telling you it’s going to be the biggest thing we’ve ever seen in the history of the United States,” one pro-Trump singer, who promotes QAnon conspiracy theories, warned in a Facebook video viewed more than 350,000 times since Monday.But the peaceful transfer of power from Mr. Trump to Mr. Biden came and went Wednesday.Among the most notable defectors appeared to be Ron Watkins, a prominent promoter of election fraud conspiracy theories who helps run an online messaging board where QAnon conspiracy theories run wild.“We gave it our all,” Mr. Watkins wrote in a Telegram post, minutes after Mr. Biden was sworn into office. “Now we need to keep our chins up and go back to our lives as best we are able.”Travis View, a conspiracy theory researcher who co-hosts The QAnon Anonymous Podcast under his pseudonym, said Mr. Watkins encouraged Trump supporters to travel to Washington for the Jan. 6 rally that led to the Capitol riots.“He did a lot of damage to a lot of people,” he said. “He’s responsible for a lot of pain.”Other QAnon followers spent their time online Wednesday calling Mr. Biden an illegitimate president and accusing Democrats of pulling off voter fraud. Republican Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene, who has expressed support for the conspiracy theories, called for Mr. Biden’s impeachment across her Twitter, Facebook, and Telegram accounts as the new president was sworn in.Other followers continued to hunt for clues that QAnon prophecies would be fulfilled, with several social media posts noting that Mr. Trump’s speech Wednesday was delivered in front of 17 American flags – a significant number to QAnon conspiracy theorists because “Q” is the 17th letter of the alphabet.“I believe the game is still being played this is not over!” one QAnon user wrote to his 26,000 Telegram followers moments after Mr. Biden took office.This story was reported by The Associated Press. Amanda Seitz reported from Chicago and David Klepper reported from Providence, Rhode Island. AP reporter Garance Burke in San Francisco and researchers at the University of California, Berkeley’s Human Rights Center Investigations Lab and the Investigative Reporting Program contributed to this report.

9 - Day One in the Oval Office: Biden reverses Trump policies
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/Politics/2021/0121/Day-One-in-the-Oval-Office-Biden-reverses-Trump-policies
United States President Joe Biden moved swiftly to dismantle Donald Trump’s legacy on his first day in office, signing a series of executive actions that reversed course on immigration, climate change, racial equity, and the handling of the coronavirus pandemic.The new president signed the orders just hours after taking the oath of office at the Capitol, pivoting quickly from his pared-down inauguration ceremony to enacting his agenda. With the stroke of a pen, Mr. Biden ordered a halt to the construction of Mr. Trump’s United States-Mexico border wall, ended the ban on travel from some Muslim-majority countries, declared his intent to rejoin the Paris Climate Accord and the World Health Organization, and revoked the approval of the Keystone XL oil pipeline, aides said.The 15 executive actions, and two directives, amount to an attempt to rewind the past four years of federal policies with striking speed. Only two recent presidents signed executive actions on their first day in office – and each signed just one. But Mr. Biden, facing the debilitating coronavirus pandemic, a damaged economy, and a riven electorate, is intent on demonstrating a sense of urgency and competence that he argues has been missing under his Republican predecessor.“There’s no time to start like today,” Mr. Biden said in his first comments to reporters as president.Mr. Biden wore a mask as he signed the orders in the Oval Office – a marked departure from Mr. Trump, who rarely wore a face covering in public and never during events in the Oval Office. But virus precautions are now required in the building. Among the executive actions signed Wednesday was one requiring masks and physical distancing on federal property and by federal employees. Mr. Biden’s order also extended the federal eviction freeze to aid those struggling from the pandemic economic fallout, created a new federal office to coordinate a national response to the virus, and restored the White House’s National Security Council directorate for global health security and defense, an office his predecessor had closed.The actions reflected the new president’s top policy priority – getting a handle on a debilitating pandemic. In his inaugural address, Mr. Biden paused for what he called his first act as president – a moment of silent prayer for the victims of the nation’s worst public health crisis in more than a century.The new president has also committed to international cooperation in fighting the pandemic. Dr. Anthony Fauci said the Biden administration will resume “regular engagement” with the World Health Organization and will “fulfill its financial obligations to the organization,” which was stripped of American funding under Mr. Trump. Mr. Biden declared that he would “press forward with speed and urgency” in coming weeks. “For we have much to do in this winter of peril and significant possibilities – much to repair, much to restore, much to heal, much to build, and much to gain,” he said in the speech. But Mr. Biden’s blitz of executive actions went beyond the pandemic. He targeted Mr. Trump’s environmental record, calling for a review of all regulations and executive actions that are deemed damaging to the environment or public health, aides said Tuesday as they previewed the moves. Mr. Biden “understands the importance of cooperation among nations,” said former Colombian president and Nobel Peace Prize winner Juan Manuel Santos, who left office in 2018. “As a matter of fact, if we don’t cooperate – all nations – to fight climate change, then we will all perish. It’s as simple as that.” French President Emmanuel Macron and Tibetan spiritual leader the Dalai Lama were among those welcoming U.S. attention to climate change. Another order instructs federal agencies to prioritize racial equity and review policies that reinforce systemic racism. Mr. Biden revoked two Trump orders related to the 2020 census. The first attempted to discern the citizenship status of every U.S. resident, and the second sought to exclude people in the U.S. illegally from the numbers used for apportioning congressional seats among the states.He also ordered federal employees to take an ethics pledge that commits them to upholding the independence of the Justice Department.The president also revoked the just-issued report of Trump’s “1776 Commission” that promotes “patriotic education.”Those moves and others will be followed by dozens more in the next 10 days, the president’s aides said, as Mr. Biden looks to redirect the country without having to go through a Senate that Democrats control by the narrowest margin and will soon turn to the impeachment trial of Mr. Trump, who is charged by the House with inciting the insurrection at the Capitol.Republicans signaled that Mr. Biden will face fierce opposition on some parts of his agenda.One of his orders seeks to fortify the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, known as DACA, a signature effort of the Obama administration that provided hundreds of thousands of young immigrants protection from deportation and a pathway to citizenship. That’s part of a broader immigration plan Mr. Biden sent to Congress on Wednesday that would provide an eight-year path to citizenship for an estimated 11 million people living in the U.S. without legal status.The plan would lead to “a permanent cycle of illegal immigration and amnesty that would hurt hard-working Americans and the millions of legal immigrants working their way through the legal immigration process,” said Chris Hartline, a spokesman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee.Even that familiar criticism seemed a return to the normalcy Mr. Biden has promised after years of disruptive and overheated politics. Hewing to tradition, Mr. Biden started his day by attending church with both Democratic and Republican leaders of Congress. His press secretary, Jen Psaki, held a briefing for reporters, a practice the Trump White House had all but abandoned in the final two months of the presidency. Mr. Psaki said she intended to restore regular briefings as part of the White House’s commitment to transparency.“I have deep respect for the role of a free and independent press in our democracy and for the role all of you play,” she said.Mr. Biden took other steps to try to signal his priorities and set the tone in his White House. As he swore in dozens of political appointees in a virtual ceremony, he declared he expected “honesty and decency” from all that worked for his administration and would fire anyone who shows disrespect to others “on the spot.”“Everyone is entitled to human decency and dignity,” Mr. Biden said. “That’s been missing in a big way for the last four years.”This story was reported by The Associated Press.

10 - ‘What’s a patriot?’ Americans stumble over dueling definitions.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/USA/Politics/2021/0121/What-s-a-patriot-Americans-stumble-over-dueling-definitions
Leaning against a fence near the stoop of the Georgia State Capitol, a man who goes by Nadir Xena and his friend Shadow call up to National Guardsmen standing above. “How’s your day going?” Some of the troops chuckle. Mr. Xena is in fatigues and combat boots. His partner wears a red bandanna as a mask; a streak of purple runs through his hair. Both are white. Like many gathered at the statehouse on Sunday, both had long rifles slung over their shoulders. But unlike the National Guard troops, these two armed men weren’t there to defend. They were there to protest what they call “tyrannical government”; to do their duty as American patriots. “They’re trampling all over the Constitution while they’re laughing at you,” says Mr. Xena. “I feel like we are doing our duty being out here, being armed.”Nearby in Decatur, Georgia, Don Sapp, a Black construction worker, had heard about the threats to the Capitol and the troops mustering to protect it, and searched for words to describe it. One in particular was confusing.“What’s a patriot?” he asks. It’s not a rhetorical question. He wants to know. Two weeks after the sacking of the U.S. Capitol by a mob of self-described patriots, many other Americans may want to know too. Yet as with so many concepts in this polarized era, the word fits the eye of its beholder. Patriots are thought of as those who defend America, but shared ideas of America are difficult to find. “I understand people wanting their grievances addressed, and I feel like that’s what they are doing more than defending the country,” says Mr. Sapp. “But I don’t share those grievances.” Crystallized in the Capitol raid, and the armed protests nationwide last weekend, is a countrywide identity crisis not seen for decades. Americans of all stripes are willing to protest what they see as injustice. But Americans who take to the streets today see radically different things – from centuries of systemic racism to threats to gun rights and, currently eclipsing all others, the Trump-engineered myth of a stolen election on Nov. 3.As the nation tries to recover from the events of Jan. 6, reconciling these conceptions of patriotism – with divisions as deep as the country’s founding – may prove crucial, lest America risks being torn apart, not by enemies outside, but by self-described patriots who love their idea of it too much to see it change. And that also means rebuilding trust in public institutions. “We should be waving the flag and saying this is what America can be and should be,” says Carolyn Gallaher, a political geographer and expert on the far-right at American University. It’s about “taking the discourse [on patriotism] back.” A natural fit for conservatives But to take it back, Americans must first understand that “patriot” has not historically been a word of unity. For decades, in fact, the term has been an unofficial name tag for much of the American right.The moniker is a natural fit, says John Pitney, a professor of politics at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, California. Conservatives value tradition and tend to express their patriotism through symbols and rituals, such as the American flag and national anthem. A term so associated with the country’s origins suits an ideology nostalgic for the political idealism of its founding.But its use has grown more complicated since the McCarthy era, when the word became a political fault line, says Professor Gallaher. At that time, suspected communists, civil rights activists, and anti-war protesters were deemed unpatriotic – and un-American. Since then, left-leaning groups have mostly avoided the term, while those on the right embraced it. “The term patriot has always been used in many respects to exclude people you don’t want to see in the body politic,” says Professor Gallaher.That sorting gave birth to the Patriot Movement, an upswell of anti-government groups in the 1980s and a godfather to the modern militia movement. Then and now, such groups rely on an iconography of the republic’s founding: pictures of early presidents, quotes from the Constitution, sometimes dressing in Revolutionary War garb while staging protests. Far-right groups use this imagery, in part, as ballast for their ideas, says Professor Gallaher. Associating their philosophy with America’s founding is an effort to monopolize patriotism itself. If they own what it means to be an American, they can justify any action.“The perception of fear”For precedents, Americans can look abroad to extremist Islamist groups that co-opt religious symbols, says Javed Ali, a former senior director for counterterrorism at the National Security Council. “Far-right extremists have weaponized symbols and images that have a positive connotation and made them into symbols and images that create the perception of fear,” he says. “Patriotism is being weaponized to justify violent action the same way that Islam was weaponized by ISIS and Al Qaeda to justify violent attacks.”Certainly not all self-described patriots support the mayhem on Jan. 6. Paul Cangialosi, a self-described “constitutional libertarian” and militia member in Nelson County, Virginia, condemns the violence that took place at the Capitol and thinks inciters should be prosecuted. Still, he thinks Congress has forgotten the people it represents, and was long overdue for a wake-up call. “A patriot’s role is to try to rein the government back in and try to force it back into the box it belongs in,” he says. And that role “eventually gets to the point where it becomes more than philosophical.” Mr. Cangialosi, an outspoken gun-rights activist, is not yet at that point, but he knows his line. If the government during President Joe Biden’s administration comes for his AR-15 military-style rifle, he says, he is willing to fire it. (President Biden has said he supports a ban on the sale of such rifles and tighter regulation of their ownership.) “To me that’s part of being a patriot,” he says. “I’m not afraid. I’m gonna speak my mind. And I’ll let the chips fall where they may.” Love of country – or Trump?The Constitution outlines a method of self-government – democratic elections – meant to give frustrated citizens an avenue for reform. But many citizens today feel too estranged from the system to act inside it, especially with a former president who sabotages its legitimacy. As the Republican Party came to orbit President Donald Trump, patriotism for many has become a matter of loyalty to him, says Professor Pitney, a former researcher at the Republican National Committee. As the two merged, some of his supporters have adopted some of his worst tendencies in the name of national pride.“He is inflaming and directing some bad currents that have always been there,” says Professor Pitney. “Patriotism should be about love of country and he’s making it about hatred of countrymen.” And hating fellow Americans makes it even harder to resolve differences peacefully.The Constitution doesn’t address the issues Americans are facing now, he says, because America wasn’t meant to get to this point. Self-government should be citizens’ political arena – rather than, say, a Hobbesian state of nature, where people use force to get what they want. When a democratic system falters, says Duke University law professor Darrell Miller, so do the laws, norms, and bonds that prevent violence.“As we saw on Jan. 6, there’s always some cohort that thinks that a legitimate government is a tyrannical government – and that the time for revolution is now,” he says. An inclusive ideaAvoiding more rollback in this era of beleaguered democracy will be difficult, but not impossible. Rebuilding American institutions will take trusting a government many feel alienated by, and trusting fellow Americans at a time when differences in politics feel jarring. But even as far back as Shays’ Rebellion in the early years of the republic, when 4,000 Massachusetts farmers revolted against what they saw as an unsympathetic, tax-heavy state government, America has faced internal revolts. It took the state government mustering a militia to subdue the self-described patriots, but high tensions abated with time. And the Civil War will always be a reminder for what happens when they don’t. Then as now citizens couldn’t agree on what it meant to be American. It’s high time, says Professor Gallaher, for the country to get it right and adopt a more inclusive idea of patriotism.That inclusiveness appeals to Rachel Goodloe, who was born abroad to Ecuadorian and Brazilian parents. Last weekend, on a visit to Austin, Texas, from San Diego with her husband, she seemed perplexed by the sight of armed protesters at the state Capitol. To Ms. Goodloe, who became a U.S. citizen when she was 13, patriotism means “honoring your country, loving your country, respecting your country and your fellow Americans.” What happened at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, she adds, wasn’t patriotism. “That’s terrorism.” That said, she believes that peaceful protesters, including self-styled patriots, have the right to gather. “That’s the beauty of America. We’re all allowed to have your opinions and your feelings of who should be the president.” Staff writer Henry Gass contributed reporting from Austin, Texas. 

11 - Counteracting violence and hatred
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/A-Christian-Science-Perspective/2021/0121/Counteracting-violence-and-hatred
U.S. president Abraham Lincoln stated in his annual message to Congress in 1862: “No personal significance, or insignificance, can spare one or another of us. The fiery trial through which we pass, will light us down, in honor or dishonor, to the latest generation.... The way is plain, peaceful, generous, just – a way which, if followed, the world will forever applaud, and God must forever bless.”Recent events have made one thing clear: There’s a ceaseless need for the values of honor, decency, respect, and pursuit of the common good that Lincoln’s message commended. Broadminded, selfless acts of individual leaders throughout history have inspired peace and progress. And they have contributed profoundly to the freedoms we cherish today.In this respect, I’ve been encouraged by the example of Christ Jesus. When facing chaos and anger, Jesus stood with divine Truth. This Truth – this divine, Father-Mother presence, God – was the spiritual power that motivated his every action and established the divine law and spiritual authority that brings about healing. It enabled him to face down ignorance, misunderstanding, and desperation.The stability and constancy of God’s intelligent goodness is present now and can be seen and demonstrated in every kind of situation. What God is and does as infinite good itself counteracts the chaos, disorder, prejudice, and self-interest that would corrupt individuals and disable governments. As Mark Sappenfield, editor of the Monitor, indicated in his recent podcast “A spiritual response to political division and upheaval,” there is no material solution to division, as we’ve seen over the past few years. But the good news is that the solution is in each of us as children of God.This highlights the need for daily prayer that affirms the absolute and forever presence of God, divine Love, the foundation on which freedom for all rests. Prayer for government that is inclusive of every citizen begins with the allness of God’s power, the all-encompassing divine goodness and justice, and God’s unity with each individual. It affirms the true nature of each of us as God’s spiritual expression. It negates and nullifies the supposed legitimacy of evil, danger, harm, and discord.Holding in our own hearts the qualities we want to see exhibited in our government and living them in our lives is effective prayer. This prayer supports and elevates society. It arrests self-seeking, self-interested motivations and embraces the wisdom and goodness of God as divine Principle and unchanging Truth. American Mary Baker Eddy, Discoverer of Christian Science and Founder of the Church of Christ, Scientist, stated in 1900 that among “the most imminent dangers confronting the coming century” were “the claims of politics and of human power, industrial slavery, and insufficient freedom of honest competition; and ritual, creed, and trusts in place of the Golden Rule, ‘Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them’ ” (“The First Church of Christ, Scientist, and Miscellany,” p. 266).She recognized that the foundation of universal brother- and sisterhood is spiritual: “namely, one God, one Mind, and ‘Love thy neighbor as thyself,’ the basis on which and by which the infinite God, good, the Father-Mother Love, is ours and we are His in divine Science” (Miscellany, p. 281).Praying is not about ignoring world events or conflict, but about going up higher – elevating our thinking to recognizing what God is doing, now. We can let peace begin with each of us, right where we are, when we hold a purely spiritual view of all, especially those we feel are at fault. This kind of unselfish action and prayer does not excuse anyone’s wrongdoing or smooth it over; it strengthens the expression of integrity and fosters individual acts of love and peace.As we live the qualities we want to see exhibited in our nations, we are doing our part to elevate the collective consciousness that yearns for a solution to injustice. This requires holding in our hearts even those with whom we disagree. Living this spirit of Christ and striving to see others the way God sees them takes the life out of fear, turmoil, and hatred. We begin to see our fellow men and women as the direct outcome and expression of divine Love.The fact is, no division or conflict can disrupt God’s government of all. Nothing can take away God’s eternal gifts of freedom and peace. As we dedicate ourselves to living our prayers, we can each more fully experience this great blessing now.Adapted from an article published on sentinel.christianscience.com, Jan. 8, 2021.

12 - Is Russia ready for honest governance?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/the-monitors-view/2021/0121/Is-Russia-ready-for-honest-governance
One of the great mysteries of 2021 is why Alexei Navalny, Russia’s most prominent dissident, returned to his homeland last Sunday. He could have led a comfortable life in Germany where he had recovered from being poisoned last year in Siberia, allegedly by Russian intelligence officers. Instead this famed anti-corruption fighter bravely went home, knowing he could face years of isolation in jail on dubious charges in one of the world’s most corrupt countries.Indeed, he is now in jail, awaiting punishment, yet convinced more than ever that more Russians are eager for honest governance and an end to their declining incomes.He is so confident of his cause flourishing without him that his staff released a video calling on people to join demonstrations at 2 p.m. on Saturday in “the central streets of your cities.”The size of the protests could determine whether Russia descends further into dictatorship under President Vladimir Putin. The Kremlin is deeply worried about the fate of the ruling party, United Russia, in parliamentary elections this September.Mr. Navalny’s popularity is driven by his frequent videos on YouTube exposing official corruption through journalistic reporting. The latest one shows a $1.35 billion palace built for Mr. Putin on the Black Sea coast. At least a quarter of the Russian population has watched his videos.“Alexei Navalny is a politician who has earned public trust through his efforts to expose and counter corruption,” states the Berlin-based watchdog Transparency International. “The reaction of the Russian society to what is happening with Navalny can serve as another confirmation of how acute and painful the problem of corruption is for our country.”Another reason for his return may be that his civic activism has planted the seeds for further reform. “While he is the face of the anticorruption movement in Russia, the ideas he represents have transcended his efforts,” writes Vincent Wu in the Global Anticorruption Blog associated with Harvard University.In dozens of cities, Mr. Navalny has created a decentralized, grassroots operation run mostly on small, anonymous donations. This campaign to expose corruption can live on without him. And it relies on his insight that Russians are ready for honesty and transparency in government.“His story shows that average citizens despise corruption, and that as long as there are advocates who are willing to fight the good fight, there will be people in the public to support them,” writes Mr. Wu.Top officials in both Europe and the United States have called for Mr. Putin to release Mr. Navalny. President Joe Biden’s national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, described the detention as “an affront to the Russian people.” Yet the famous dissident may have another plan, one wrapped in a mystery over why he returned but one that suggests Russia is poised to change without him.

13 - ‘A closer bond of union’
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/A-Christian-Science-Perspective/2021/0120/A-closer-bond-of-union

Let all that now divides us
Remove and pass away,
Like shadows of the morning
Before the blaze of day.
Let all that now unites us
More sweet and lasting prove,
A closer bond of union,
In a blest land of love.– Jane Borthwick, “Christian Science Hymnal,” No. 196
I am giving you a new command – love one another. Just as I have loved you, so you must love one another.– John 13:34, J.B. Phillips, “The New Testament in Modern English”Some more great ideas! To hear a podcast discussion about how God’s goodness restores, heals, protects, and comforts, please click through to “Omnipresence: God’s presence embraces our past, present, and future,” a recent episode of Sentinel Watch on www.JSH-Online.com titled. There is no paywall for this podcast.

14 - One head start for Biden in unifying Americans
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/the-monitors-view/2021/0120/One-head-start-for-Biden-in-unifying-Americans
In his inaugural speech Wednesday, President Joe Biden set a task for himself to bring “America together, uniting our people.” As big as that task might be, it was made slightly easier Tuesday by the outgoing Trump administration. The State Department agreed with a key foreign-policy position of Mr. Biden and officially designated China’s treatment of its minority Uyghurs as genocide. In a rare case of unity, two presidents have now given voice to at least a million voiceless people in secret concentration camps in China where they are being tortured, forcibly sterilized, or even killed.Unlike many domestic issues, American leaders have worked hard to maintain a bipartisan foreign policy, especially in trying to prevent mass atrocities. Such unity remains a template for tackling issues such as race, poverty, and lately, the coronavirus. It has been sustained by the fact that the United States has a record of trying to end genocide based on the ideal of protecting innocent people during a conflict or under a dictatorship.Since 2017, China’s rulers have ruthlessly repressed the mostly Muslim ethnic minorities in its northwestern region of Xinjiang. The 11 million or so Uyghurs and other groups have found few countries to defend them. Now the U.S. has put the Chinese government on notice that bilateral ties depend on Beijing adhering to the international convention against genocide.In his designation of genocide inside China, Mike Pompeo, Mr. Tump’s secretary of state, said: “So long as we remain silent, party elites will continue to commit human-rights abuses against the people of China with impunity. We cannot allow this cycle of evil to continue.” Mr. Biden, meanwhile, has made clear his commitment to preventing genocide by nominating Samantha Power as a member of his National Security Council and as administrator of the U.S. Agency for International Development. Author of the book “A Problem From Hell: America and the Age of Genocide,” Ms. Power is a “leading voice for humane and principled American engagement in the world,” Mr. Biden said.Rallying Americans around the task of ending the most heinous of crimes has a long history, going back to the liberation of Jews during World War II. Once again, the U.S. appears committed to helping a minority group under threat, this time in China. For Mr. Biden, such unity abroad is a good start to finding the unity at home he promises as the new president.

15 - Dear Mr. President: 10 letters of advice for Biden
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/2021/0120/Dear-Mr.-President-10-letters-of-advice-for-Biden
In 10 letters to President Joe Biden, prominent public figures in business, academia, and public life weigh in on what he should do to bring the country together at a fraught time for American democracy.Build a working coalition 
By Leon E. PanettaMr. Panetta is a former director of the CIA and secretary of defense under President Barack Obama.Dear Joe:My deepest congratulations on your inauguration as the 46th president of the United States. Having known and worked with you for more than 40 years, I believe you are one of the most experienced and qualified individuals to serve as the nation’s commander in chief.No one better understands the whirlwind of critical problems at home and abroad that you will be inheriting. And no one knows better how quickly you can fail if you are unable to build a bipartisan working majority in the House and Senate that will work with you to govern.The nation cannot withstand four more years of partisan gridlock and dysfunction. In our democracy, we govern either by leadership or by crisis. If leadership is willing to take the risks necessary to build consensus, we can avoid or certainly contain crisis. But if leadership is not there, we will inevitably govern by crisis. But there is a price to be paid for relying on crisis – the loss of trust of the American people in our system of governing.You know what it takes to work together to get things done. It is about building relationships, and the best time to build that working coalition is in the first 100 days of the new administration. The nucleus for that coalition can begin with the bipartisan members of the House and Senate who successfully worked on the last COVID-19 aid package.Your first legislative efforts should focus on delivering opportunity for all. Some critical elements of that agenda could be an additional recovery bill that provides businesses, workers, states, and communities the federal assistance needed to get them back on their feet; a rebuild America bill that funds new infrastructure jobs in both rural and urban America; a national service bill that gives every young person the funds to pay for a college education or skill training in exchange for two years of public service; and a bill to renew the promise of America that enacts comprehensive immigration reform that provides for border security, a legal workforce, and a path to citizenship. Of course, your administration will have to deal with a number of priorities at home and abroad, but the first job is to show that you can successfully govern.By passing a strong bipartisan agenda, you will not only restore the American dream of equal opportunity for all, but you will also help restore faith in our democracy. God bless you.Job one: Restore public trust in government
By Christine Todd WhitmanMs. Whitman is a former governor of New Jersey and administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under President George W. Bush.As you enter office, our nation is facing threats to the very foundation of our democracy. Beyond the legislation and policy decisions you’ll make in office, the greatest challenge you will face is to restore America’s trust in government, which has been most recently undermined by the willingness of a substantial number of congressional Republicans to continue to challenge what was a safe and accurate election and to fail to decry the storming of the Capitol by a Trump-incited mob.Our institutions were established for our “general welfare,” as it says in the Constitution’s preamble. And yet, not surprisingly, many Americans no longer trust that our government is working for their good. On all sides of the political spectrum, belief in the integrity of public leaders, the competence of public institutions, and the value of the rule of law has eroded.Trust in government includes respect for our country’s founding documents and the rule of law. The absence of this respect paves the way to abuse of power and disregard for liberties. If you can reestablish this common foundation of trust, it will allow you to move forward on other important initiatives.The shared acceptance of science and fact is also part of this general respect for institutions. Until we restore public trust in science, people will be skeptical of the COVID-19 vaccine, hampering our ability to get the virus under control.That trust will also impact our nation’s health in the long run, as we restore the regulations designed to protect us. Our country must reach a consensus on the value of science in order to avoid intensifying health disasters in the short and long term.You are a patriot who has respected our country, our Constitution, and the rule of law throughout your career. While restoring our nation’s trust is a tall order, too large for any one president, you are aware of the problem and are well suited to the task. Our country needs a leader of integrity and decency to start healing, and I believe you are that leader that will help bring our country together again.Focus on solutions, not party labels
By Francis SuarezMr. Suarez is the mayor of Miami.Dear Mr. President:You’ve been entrusted to serve as president in a period best described as “no ordinary time.” Some are hoping that you fail. Some are praying that you succeed. But all of us need you to re-instill decency in our politics, fairness in our discourse, and respect for all of our liberties and all of our citizens. While I’m fairly new to politics, I’ve learned a few things. 1. See Americans, not parties. While I don’t claim to be an expert, I know this: Americans want a government that serves them, not any elite or clique. As a mayor, I’ve learned that people look to their elected leaders for practical solutions, not partisan ones. They expect results, not political treatises. Please focus on getting things done, not getting things “right.” Look beyond labels and look at character.Republican senators such as Ben Sasse have championed smart, practical policies for working people that actually work. Some Democratic senators have joined them, and so can you. We can defend our principles while also creating practical solutions that deliver for working people. And as many mayors know, “getting things done” is always good politics. 2. Invest in Americans, not in ideologies. Americans are our greatest national resource and we need to invest in them through infrastructure, education, and a competitive tax system that rewards initiative and innovation while punishing irresponsible and destructive behavior. All new infrastructure needs to be climate adaptive. Both parties recognize that bridges, roads, and other new projects need to be built to endure increased storms, flooding, tornadoes, wildfires, and other natural disasters. And climate-adaptive infrastructure will drive down our insurance premiums, serving effectively as a broad-based tax cut for those who need it most.Our educational system now needs to be based on lifelong learning and continuous training. We need to see education not simply as a way to get a degree but as part of a continuous journey, where everyone can learn, grow, find employment, and stay employed in a fast-changing job market. 3. Look to the future, not to the past. A new generation of elected officials are emerging who can transcend past divisions and personal invective, while delivering principled and smart solutions. The nature of our national challenges quite simply exceeds the solutions of one single person or of one single party. We literally need each other to survive and to succeed. And we also need to include our state and local leaders just as we have in the past. Public health, climate adaptation, workforce education, and economic development are now national security issues. And they will continue to be.We also need to invest in our police and their training, not defund them or defund our criminal justice system. And just as we must remove the social poison of entrenched racism from our nation, we must remove the political poison of militant socialism from our politics.You have great personal relationships with members of Congress, national figures, and world leaders. Listen to them, learn from them, and look for solutions that are not simply bipartisan but nonpartisan. The buck stops with you. You’ve got the ball now; go for it!Why the world needs American leadership
By Mary RobinsonMs. Robinson is a former president of Ireland and former United Nations high commissioner for human rights who chairs The Elders, an international human rights organization. Dear Mr. President: You assume office at a critical moment for your country and the whole world. The impact of COVID-19 has been devastating for global health, trade, economic performance, and social cohesion. It has underscored the interconnectedness and fragility of human societies, and starkly exposed the hollow boasts of populist and nationalist rhetoric.No one country, not even one as large and powerful as the United States, can tackle the pandemic alone. But American leadership is critical in galvanizing a coordinated global response, and your presidency can make a crucial difference by restoring the principles of multilateral cooperation, trust, and integrity to decision-making.One crucial step will be to rejoin the World Health Organization, which remains the indispensable global body to lead the response to COVID-19 and future pandemics. The outgoing administration’s decision to withdraw the U.S. from the WHO was myopic and deeply damaging, and I hope it will be quickly reversed. I am already heartened by your pledge to rejoin the Paris Agreement on climate change and reassert American leadership in the face of this existential challenge. This will be an urgent year for climate action, culminating in the COP26 U.N. climate summit in Glasgow, Scotland, in November. There is now not a moment to lose to reengage in international climate diplomacy, meet commitments on climate finance to help developing nations, and cut national emissions. Across the board, we need to restore cooperation and compassion as the necessary guides of world affairs, from climate action and nuclear nonproliferation to racial justice, gender equality, and respecting the rights of migrants and refugees. Mr. President, I know how proud you are of your Irish heritage, which includes links to my own hometown of Ballina in County Mayo. This year, people all across Ireland will celebrate the visit to my country in the 1840s of the great African American abolitionist, Frederick Douglass, whose struggle for freedom continues to inspire people today. Douglass once said that “the life of a nation is secure only while the nation is honest, truthful, and virtuous.” After the past tumultuous 12 months, we need honesty, truth, and virtue more than ever at the heart of public life. I have every hope and confidence that you will be guided by these values as you undertake your most important task ahead.In global affairs, no more US preeminence 
By Andrew BacevichDr. Bacevich is a professor emeritus at Boston University and president of the Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft.Dear President Biden:Soon after winning election to the presidency, you announced that “America is back, ready to lead the world” and to resume its accustomed place “at the head of the table.” Among those distressed that your predecessor showed so little interest in leading anything anywhere, such sentiments resonate.In the political circles where you have spent virtually your entire adult life, belief that history summons the United States to lead the world is an article of faith. So too is the conviction that the world itself yearns for American leadership, with other nations eager for Washington to occupy a position of privilege. A return to pre-Trump normalcy implies a restoration of U.S. global preeminence.  I urge you to reconsider any such expectation. In the aftermath of World War II, with international politics centered on a bipolar competition between East and West, such a formulation possessed a certain utility. The euphoria unleashed by the end of the Cold War made the temptation to double down on such claims all but irresistible.But the era of American primacy has ended. We may date its demise from the March 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq, which as a U.S. senator you supported. In the roughly two decades since, as the U.S. was squandering trillions of dollars in failed military campaigns, the global order has undergone a transformation. The emergence of new threats in the form of climate change and pandemics offers one example. The shifting distribution of power in East Asia offers a second, with nuclear proliferation and our nation’s emergence as the world’s leading debtor others. So the global table at which your administration will take a seat is not rectangular. It is round. No nation or body of nations will sit at its head. No doubt the clout wielded by individual countries gathered around that table varies – not all are equal. But none will dominate – not China, not Russia, not us, not anyone. Acknowledging this reality implies a radically different approach to statecraft, one that should emphasize collaboration rather than coercion, setting an example rather than issuing threats and inflicting punishment.  Yes, the U.S. must always stand ready to defend its vital interests from attack. But much as those interests are changing, so too should the means employed to protect them.Listen to a diversity of voices and views
By Ruth J. Simmons Dr. Simmons is president of Prairie View A&M University, a historically Black university in Texas.  As educational leaders, we are accustomed to giving advice to students as they enter our institutions and, again, as they leave to face the future. The advice we impart as they begin their journey is simple: work hard, embrace difference, acknowledge the importance of criticism, and remain open to the prospect of learning from individuals from every stratum of society. While the theater of opportunity and action is far more vast and complex for the president of the United States, there may be surprising similarities in the opportunities for a president to show needed leadership at a particularly challenging moment of history.It would normally be superfluous if not ridiculous to urge the president to work hard, but recent history informs us how important such an exhortation may be. We not only expect our leaders to engage deeply with the issues of importance to the American people, but we also want to see an intense level of engagement manifested daily. Nothing matters more to us when we are experiencing serious problems than to see our leaders furrow their brow, dig in, demonstrate concern, and take action that is in line with the magnitude of the problems we face. So, let us see how hard you’re trying, Mr. President. You won’t always get it right when it comes to your decision-making and actions, but your sincere and selfless engagement with the issues will help to soothe our concerns.Embracing difference is a central tenet of self-improvement. Accepting that others may hold valid perspectives that can provide greater clarity and helpfully improve outcomes is an essential aspect of wise, inclusive leadership. Many surround themselves with longtime supporters eager to form a chorus of approval for leaders often beleaguered by criticism. I ask that you fight the impulse to surround yourself with those who are comfortable interlocutors, telling you what you most desire to hear. The danger of such a path is manifest in the problems we face today as a nation: massive unemployment and economic disarray, a disintegrating social fabric, a Constitution in peril. Robust inclusion of a range of perspectives will instill greater confidence in the public that we are on a better path to resolve the issues that most concern us.We have recently been stung by a harrowing set of events that point to significant disparities in the way different groups are treated, leading to long-lived issues that contribute to social fracture and political upheaval. It is possible to be aware of these kinds of gaps in equality if one pays close attention and listens to those outside the policy bubbles. I ask that your visitors to the White House be not just the wealthy, famous, and politically connected, but also the average citizens who can give you a sense of where we are headed as a nation. The country belongs to all of us and, while I know that it is your inclination to be inclusive, I ask that this be made clear to those across the country in the actions you take, in the directions you give to Cabinet members, and in the way your schedule is designed.
Mr. President, like our students setting out on their academic journey, you will not want for advice and direction. Remember that the people elected you because of your character and your commitment to them and the country. In the final analysis, I hope you will rely mostly on your experience and knowledge, along with the empathy you have for those suffering and cast aside, to lift the hopes of our youth. The young people we welcome every year to our schools and universities are all-important to the future of the country. Embrace them. Inspire them. Show them the importance of including, caring for, and serving others. In short, show them how to lead.Take steps to curb corrosive populism
By William G. Howell and Terry M. Moe Dr. Howell, a professor at the University of Chicago, and Dr. Moe, a professor at Stanford University, are the authors of “Presidents, Populism, and the Crisis of Democracy.” With Joe Biden’s election, our nation averted catastrophe. Four more years of Donald Trump’s populist-authoritarian rule could have destroyed American democracy. What we’ve won, however, is merely a reprieve. The nation’s crisis of democracy continues, as the recent mob attack on Congress makes clear. The Biden administration must recognize this crisis for what it is and take calculated actions to mitigate it.  Mr. Trump’s rise to power was partly predicated on white backlash to growing diversity, but also on the very real economic harms and cultural anxieties born of rising globalization, automation, immigration, and urbanization. These are serious problems that our government has been entirely ineffective at dealing with, resulting in a surge of populist anger against a system that doesn’t work, and support for a strongman like Mr. Trump who can attack that system and get things done on his own. Mr. Trump has lost the presidency. But his populist base and its anti-system anger are not going away, and they remain a mortal threat to democracy. Mr. Biden’s challenge is to address the sources of this threat by making government work for these people – and for everybody.Mr. Biden can defuse populism in two ways. First, he can pursue policies – on immigration, job training, trade, health care, infrastructure, rural community investment, and more – that alleviate the substantive causes of populist anger. Second, and more fundamentally, he can push for institutional reforms – designed, for example, to streamline the legislative process through fast-track decision-making and to depoliticize the federal bureaucracy – that enhance the government’s overall capacity for effective performance.With Congress evenly split and Republicans intent on blocking, progress will be difficult. The current need for policy action and institutional reform vastly outstrips what the present political moment allows. Still, these aspirations must be front and center. Mr. Biden should speak emphatically about the long-standing failures of government – Democratic as well as Republican – and his intention to dramatically improve how government works, especially for society’s most alienated. Some legislation may succeed, but Mr. Biden also can use his unilateral powers to improve the lives of vulnerable Americans. Done right, early achievements can pave the way for bigger electoral victories – and more consequential policies and reforms that permanently end the populist threat. Mr. Biden’s first year in office must be more than a restoration of civility and normalcy. America remains in crisis. He needs to see himself as playing a pivotal role in American history: the savior of our democracy.For students, debt relief, not blanket cancellation
By Heidi Heitkamp Ms. Heitkamp served as the first female senator elected from North Dakota from 2013 to 2019. She is co-founder of the One Country Project, which aims to reconnect Democrats with rural America.For the good of the economic future of our country, the Biden administration must address crushing student loan debt. However, it would be politically wise to proceed with caution. Blanket debt forgiveness is seen by many Americans as grossly unfair. This is particularly true for Americans who worked their way through college, served in our military to qualify for GI student benefits, sacrificed to save to pay for their children’s education, and already paid back their student loans. It’s also true for Americans who never attended college because of the high cost.  Yet there are alternatives that could successfully navigate the realities of a failed and onerous student loan system and the concerns that total loan forgiveness is an unfair bailout. America could unite behind an alternative plan that centers on the following principles:• Interest rate reform. Adjust student loan interest rates to a variable rate equal to today’s 10-year Treasury note rate. Further, the U.S. Department of Education should apply the rate retroactively over the period of the past 10 years of loan repayment. Current federal direct loan rates range from 2.75% for undergraduates to 5.3% for graduate students. The current 10-year Treasury note is less than 1%. Once interest rates are adjusted, any overpayment from interest in the past will be applied to the loan principal and in many cases will wipe out the debt. If a person has overpaid principal, the department will reimburse that student the excess amount. • First-generation students. Give special consideration to first-generation college students by applying retroactively a 0% interest rate to their student loans. • Public service. Implement and broaden loan forgiveness programs for those who go into public service. People, for instance, who become police officers, teachers, firefighters, doctors, and nurses – and who meet the time requirements – must be given total debt forgiveness as promised.  • Business incentives. Permanently increase to $20,000 the amount an employer can contribute, tax free, to an employee to repay student loans. Create a student debt forgiveness program within the Small Business Administration to help Americans who want to start a business get student loan relief. Student debt reform done strategically, as opposed to offering across-the-board debt forgiveness, will be more broadly accepted and would not add fuel to the fires of political division. There are numerous examples of the government giving no- or low-interest loans to business recipients to further America’s economic goals. Nothing can be more important than investing in Americans and the American dream of economic opportunity. Pursuing that dream should not come with overwhelming debt and the inability to get ahead.Work across the aisle on climate
By Carlos CurbeloMr. Curbelo is a former U.S. representative from Florida.Dear Mr. President: Congratulations on your electoral victory. You have promised to heal and unite our country. I wish you success – for your sake and for the sake of every American.I had the privilege of serving in Congress for four years and dedicated a plurality of my time to establishing a dialogue and building bipartisan consensus in favor of sensible and necessary climate policy solutions. With my fellow Floridian Ted Deutch, we chartered the Climate Solutions Caucus in the House – the first-ever organization inside Congress dedicated to addressing climate change and its consequences. For Republicans, engaging on this issue can be complicated. Attacks come from both the far-right and the far-left, and many environmental organizations are hesitant to work with Republicans or recognize their efforts. The world urgently needs meaningful action on climate policy. This cannot happen without our country’s leadership, and our country cannot effectively lead until we achieve a minimum degree of bipartisan consensus. In other words, climate change requires durable, consequential policy solutions that can clear both chambers. I assure you there are Republicans in Congress who will listen and who understand the significance and seriousness of this matter. I know them, and I have worked with them. In fact, in the shadow of the outgoing administration, Republicans worked with Democrats to pass modest but significant legislation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. While it might be tempting for some to continue weaponizing this issue for political gain, regrettably there is no time for such games. I strongly urge you to meet early and often with willing Republicans in order to continue building momentum for the climate solutions that will secure a healthy and prosperous future for rising generations.Focus on stemming both racial and wealth inequality 
By James Pierce Mr. Pierce, an executive with the global food corporation Cargill, is a newly elected member of the Edina City Council in Edina, Minnesota.The year 2020 was challenging, yet I have never been more encouraged by the human spirit. In the face of so many challenges – exacerbated by the events over the past few weeks – our country continues to find ways to endure. To maintain momentum, we need to resolve issues of racial equity, socioeconomic equality, and climate change.The fabric of our nation is knitted together in a belief that the Declaration of Independence got it right with the words “all men are created equal.” As aspirational as these words were, many argue that Thomas Jefferson was not really referring to humanity. Regardless, this great nation has yet to live up to the promise of this seminal statement. As our demographics continue to shift, I ask you to intensify your focus on racial equity. To continue to grow this nation, all Americans must believe that our success is inextricably tied together. We must eliminate systems, practices, and policies that create an environment of institutional unfairness. Its effects are present throughout our justice, education, and health care systems. It is this unfairness that continues to hold back people of color. If left unchecked, it will inevitably undermine our future. For America to fulfill its promise, we need every American to thrive, not just survive.  The pandemic is the most recent event highlighting the socioeconomic inequalities in our nation. Those with professional jobs were able to continue making a living, with minimal risk. Many with nonprofessional jobs were no longer able to earn an income. Those who could did so at reduced pay and in greater danger.We must find a way to share these burdens more equally. When everyone shares in the success, more are able to develop wealth and build equity. Staying on our current path will continue to increase the wealth divide and ultimately threaten the socioeconomic fabric of the nation.Finally, Mr. President, I implore you to refocus on the issue of climate change. My favorite quote is from Nelson Henderson. “The true meaning of life is planting trees under whose shade you do not expect to sit.” For the good of future generations, I ask you to solidify our approach toward green energy, setting us on a path to reverse climate change.  Legacies are created during a lifetime, but often not fully recognized until well after. I hope that your presidency will be remembered for setting us on a path to truly fulfill the promises of this great nation for all Americans.

16 - CEOs spurn Trump and his allies: How big a blow?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2021/0115/CEOs-spurn-Trump-and-his-allies-How-big-a-blow
The stunning Capitol riot has engendered its own remarkable reaction: Corporate America is voicing anger about the violence and the Republican “stolen election” rhetoric that accompanied it.From pointed statements to voiding contracts to pausing political contributions, corporations and other entities have made their positions known in ways that would have seemed unthinkable two weeks ago. The immediate damage to President Donald Trump’s reputation is evident as staunch business allies like Deutsche Bank pull away from him and social media companies “deplatform” him by suspending his accounts. Corporations may be reflecting public opinion as much as leading it. A new Pew Research Center poll finds Mr. Trump is leaving the White House with the lowest job approval of his presidency (29%) and that 68% of Americans do not want him to remain a political figure after leaving office. Still, the corporate voices are important. The public currently bestows greater trust in business than in politicians. The damage could be long term to Mr. Trump – and to politicians who continue to support him.The question is how broad and persistent a corporate backlash will be. Corporations, after all, have a history of funding politicians in concert with their efforts to lobby for influence over legislation.“This is primarily a symbolic move as a way to send a signal to the Republican Party that the violence that we saw ... is simply not acceptable in a democracy,” says David Primo, a professor of political science and business administration at the University of Rochester. “There was genuine outrage. But the responses were very carefully calibrated. ... They wanted to buy themselves flexibility.”One of the early political casualties appears to be Doug Steinhardt, a gung-ho pro-Trump New Jersey attorney who suddenly suspended his campaign for governor on Monday, citing “unforeseen professional obligations.”Other pro-Trump candidates may face similar decisions in the coming weeks and months, at least in heavily Democratic states, as they feel out the electorate and the corporations that might – or might not – donate to their campaigns. “Symbolically, it’s important that the Republican Party discovers that they cannot rely on Home Depot and other corporations,” says Jerry Davis, professor of management and organizations at the University of Michigan’s Ross School of Business. But “that’s a very old-school big business response. What’s interesting to me is that tech responds by deplatforming.”The corporate backlash has been uncharacteristically direct. “[W]e believe the President’s behavior – including encouraging an assault on the Capitol and attempting to overturn the results of a legitimate, democratic election – deserves the strongest possible condemnation,” the Business Roundtable said in a statement Wednesday.Corporations’ financial moves have also been direct, potentially hitting Mr. Trump’s ability to get out his message on at least three fronts.Most immediately, they hit Mr. Trump and his business in the pocketbook at a time when his golf and hotel properties were already struggling because of the pandemic. According to Forbes estimates, his net worth fell from $4.5 billion a few months before his 2016 election to $2.5 billion today. Deutsche Bank, a key longtime lender to the Trump Organization, reportedly said it was cutting its ties to the business. New York’s Signature Bank said it was closing Mr. Trump’s personal accounts. New York City is moving to cancel its contracts with the company to run skating rinks, a carousel, and a golf course. PGA of America on Sunday announced it would no longer hold its 2022 championship on Mr. Trump’s golf course in New Jersey.The operations of the privately owned Trump Organization are so opaque that it’s hard to tell how meaningful these losses are. What is clear is that the Trump brand has taken a big hit because of the Capitol riot. From the pandemic to his controversial presidency and reported large business debts, the risks to the Trump corporate empire are significant. “What may be disastrous for Trump is being seen as a failed businessman and being seen as a dishonest businessman,” says Ciara Torres-Spelliscy, a fellow at New York University’s Brennan Center for Justice and author of the 2019 book “Political Brands,” which examines the 2016 election.The Manhattan District Attorney’s Office is investigating the Trump Organization for criminal activity.Lost megaphonePerhaps the bigger blow to the president’s political clout is the deplatforming from the major social media firms. When presidents leave office, they lose a huge megaphone to reach their supporters. Facebook and YouTube have crimped Mr. Trump’s outreach even more by suspending his accounts. Snapchat and Twitter did so permanently, the latter’s move a particular blow for the tweet-prone president.Social media allowed Mr. Trump to spread his unproven claims of a stolen election quickly and repeatedly. “You’re much more likely to believe a lie if it comes to you through your network of trust,” says Ms. Torres-Spelliscy. “Part of what explains the myth of voter fraud being believed by so many people is that it came through a network that they trusted, which was the president and his Twitter feed and his Facebook posts. ‘Deplatforming’ him takes away that vector for that lie.”The deplatforming is the most effective anti-Trump action that corporations have taken, but it may backfire, says Ray La Raja, a political science professor at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. “It’s a risk for these organizations to do that because it really calls attention to how much power they have.”The third front of corporate opposition is targeting his political supporters, especially the 147 members of Congress who last week objected to one or more certifications of President-elect Joe Biden’s election.More than 50 corporate political action committees, including those for Goldman Sachs, American Airlines, Blue Cross Blue Shield, and Dow, have temporarily suspended donations to either all members of Congress or the 147 objectors specifically. And other PACs are mulling similar actions. Hallmark’s PAC has asked objecting Sens. Josh Hawley and Roger Marshall for its donations back. Financial adviser Charles Schwab is dissolving its PAC altogether.As big as corporate PACs are, they’re less important than they used to be. For one thing, politicians increasingly rely on small donors, along with billionaires. In the most recent election cycle, the 147 GOP objectors raised in all some $68 million from corporate PACs – some 16% of their total fundraising, according to the Center for Responsive Politics (CRP), a Washington nonprofit that tracks campaign money. Some pro-Trump politicians are more reliant on PACs than others.Also, corporations can donate to so-called dark pools, which makes contributions hard to trace. For example, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America gave some $144,000 to GOP candidates in PAC money but $4.5 million to a GOP dark money group called American Action Network, the CRP reports.“We don’t know, for the most part, who the corporations are funding,” says Beth Allen, a spokeswoman for the Communications Workers of America, a union that is calling for comprehensive campaign finance reform. Backlash as a fundraising tool?For Trump politicians in red states, the corporate backlash could actually prove to be a valuable fundraising tool if they can position themselves as standing up to corporations rather than caving to them, says Professor Primo of the University of Rochester. “A lot is going to depend, of course, on whether these legislators are still considered viable for reelection in their district.”For the corporate actions to prove meaningful in the long term, they will have to stay in place for some time, campaign finance experts say. That includes the pause in PAC donations and the social media companies’ bans on Mr. Trump.But voters’ memories are short. Political fortunes can turn on a dime. In 2018, for example, several corporate PACs asked for their donations back after Republican Sen. Cindy Hyde-Smith of Mississippi made controversial comments about attending public hangings and curtailing Democratic votes. Despite the lack of corporate support, she won the special election. A year later, several major PACS, including Exxon Mobil and Genentech, were contributing to her campaign, and she won reelection in 2020. An ardent Trump supporter, she is one of the handful of senators who voted last week against certifying the election results of Arizona and Pennsylvania.The same uncertainty holds true for Mr. Trump’s political future.“How many times have we said, ‘Oh, this is it. ... He’s gone too far this time,’” Professor Primo says. “He’s come back time and again. So it would be a mistake to just think he’s going to go away into the night quietly.”

17 - US unemployment applications spike to highest since August
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2021/0114/US-unemployment-applications-spike-to-highest-since-August
The number of people seeking unemployment aid soared last week to 965,000, the most since late August, with evidence that the resurgent virus has caused a spike in layoffs.The latest figures for jobless claims, issued Thursday by the United States Labor Department, remain at levels never seen until the virus struck. Before the pandemic, weekly applications typically numbered around 225,000. Last spring, after nationwide shutdowns took effect, applications for jobless benefits spiked to nearly 7 million – 10 times the previous record high. After declining over the summer, weekly claims have been stuck above 700,000 since September.The high pace of layoffs coincides with an economy that has faltered as consumers have avoided traveling, shopping, and dining out in the face of soaring viral caseloads. More than 4,300 deaths were reported Tuesday, another record high. Shutdowns of restaurants, bars, and other venues where people gather in California, New York, and other states have likely forced up layoffs.Some states and cities are resisting shutdowns, partly out of fear of the economic consequences but raising the risk of further infections. Minnesota allowed in-person dining to resume this week. Michigan is poised to do the same. Some bars and restaurants in Kansas City are extending their hours.In addition to the first-time applications for unemployment aid last week, the government said Thursday that 5.3 million Americans are continuing to receive state jobless benefits, up from 5.1 million in the previous week.Many more Americans are receiving jobless aid from two federal programs – one that provides extended benefits to people who have exhausted their state aid and another that supplies benefits to self-employed and contract workers.Those two programs had expired near the end of December. They were belatedly renewed, through mid-March, in a $900 billion rescue aid package that Congress approved and President Donald Trump signed into law. That package also includes $600 relief checks for most adults and a supplemental unemployment benefit payment of $300 a week. Congressional Democrats favor boosting the checks to $2,000 and extending federal aid beyond March, as does President-elect Joe Biden.The U.S. job market’s weakness was made painfully clear in the December employment report that the government issued last week. Employers shed jobs for the first time since April as the pandemic tightened its grip on consumers and businesses.The figures also depicted a sharply uneven job market: The losses last month were concentrated among restaurants, bars, hotels, and entertainment venues – places that provide in-person services that some governments have restricted or that consumers are avoiding. Educational services, mostly colleges and universities, also cut workers in December. So did film and music studios.Most other large industries, though, reported job gains. Many economists had expected last spring that job losses would spread to more industries. Though all sectors of the economy initially laid off workers, most of them have avoided deep layoffs. Manufacturing, construction, and professional services like engineering and architecture, for example, all added jobs in December.At the same time, many companies seem reluctant to ramp up hiring. A government report Tuesday showed that employers advertised fewer open jobs in November than in October. The decline, while small, was widespread across most industries. Even now, the nation has nearly 10 million fewer jobs than it did before the pandemic sent the economy into a deep recession nearly a year ago, having recovered just 56% of the jobs lost in the spring.Many economists say that once coronavirus vaccines are more widely distributed, a broader recovery should take hold in the second half of the year. The incoming Biden administration, along with a now fully Democratic-led House and Senate, is also expected to push more rescue aid and spending measures that could accelerate growth.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

18 - How young people are responding to the COVID-19 economy
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2021/0113/How-young-people-are-responding-to-the-COVID-19-economy
Adesola Akerele had just landed an internship at a television production company in London when the coronavirus hit, and her dream job was gone.But as the pandemic halted studies and wiped out employment opportunities for millions of young people around the world, the recent graduate found a silver lining – using the lockdown to launch her career as an independent screenwriter.Ms. Akerele had always wanted to write about the experience of being Black in Britain, and as global anti-racism protests spread last year, she found people wanted to listen.“The pandemic gave me something I didn’t have before: time to write and develop my own ideas,” she told the Thomson Reuters Foundation.From teenagers coding in their bedrooms to graduates spurning scarce entry-level jobs to set up businesses, Ms. Akerele belongs to Generation COVID – young people who will have to innovate to enter the labor market in 2021 against tough odds.One in 6 young people have stopped working since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, and about half reported a delay in their studies, according to a survey by the United Nations’ International Labor Organization (ILO).Labor experts say it is too soon to know exactly how this will impact the generation’s lifelong career prospects, but that their path to work is unlikely to be conventional in 2021 and beyond.“Young people are being more entrepreneurial and looking at career and employment as well as education in a more non-traditional way,” said Susan Reichle, president and CEO of the International Youth Foundation, a United States-based nonprofit.“The traditional sort of first jobs in the service industry, in the hospitality industry are just not there.”Bhargav Joshi was hired at the start of the year as a commis chef at a high-end Italian restaurant in Mumbai. When he was laid off due to COVID-19, he took his skills into his parents’ kitchen and opened his own takeaway.“It’s been five months since I started. I have managed to break even and that is a big accomplishment for me,” Mr. Joshi said.The shift towards entrepreneurship and gig work was underway even before the pandemic among youth, who are three times as likely to be unemployed compared with people aged over 25, according to the ILO.With so many applicants chasing so few jobs, Ms. Akerele, the screenwriter, realized she could benefit more from pursuing independent projects and freelance work than sending off applications.In October, she signed with an agency to work on a TV show about the young Black British experience.Ms. Reichle said many young people lack the means to launch their own companies or pursue creative projects, but with more government support they could.Kimberly-Viola Heita thought 2020 would be the year she became a student radio presenter and formed a new political society at the University of Namibia.She was excited for her classes and debates with peers, but when the coronavirus forced the school to close many of her classmates went home to rural areas with minimal internet access. Online learning became a luxury.Instead of disconnecting, Ms. Heita took the political science society of nearly 100 students onto WhatsApp, and the messaging platform became a source of debate, motivation, and support, she said.“2020 has forced us to innovate, collaborate and discover resilience we didn’t know we had,” she said.As jobs and education moved online during the pandemic, digital skills became in more demand than ever – a trend which will likely continue, said Drew Gardiner, a youth employment specialist at the ILO.“Young people very much want to get the coding skills, the artificial intelligence skills, but also simpler stuff, like online work translating and editing,” he said.Training in such skills is not always readily available, but initiatives are springing up around the world to meet demand. Aisha Abubakar, in northern Nigeria, took part in Click-On Kaduna, a World Bank pilot project last year that trained young people in digital marketing, graphics and design, and ways to access remote online work.Ms. Abubakar is an interior designer but did not know how to find clients before the course, she said.Now her business is flourishing, and she has also set up an informal mentoring program via WhatsApp to help other women in her community digitize their small businesses.Out of 12,000 young people surveyed by the ILO, about half said they had become vulnerable to anxiety or depression since the start of the pandemic, with those who had lost their jobs the most affected.“The uncertainty that the situation has created about their futures is raising really big red flags for us,” said Nikita Sanaullah, senior policy officer on social and economic inclusion at the European Youth Forum.In many European countries, youth have a harder time accessing social services such as unemployment benefits because they have not banked enough work hours to do so, said Ms. Sanaullah. And as youth lose their incomes, they may also lose housing, she said.“This was a big challenge even before this crisis occurred,” she said, adding that despite their difficulties, young people were perhaps becoming more engaged in social activism.In San Francisco, James Poetzscher found an unusual way to help when he started making online maps of air pollution as a hobby.When wildfires engulfed California in August, he took his project one step further and built an air-quality data portal for government and nonprofit organizations to use – from his bedroom.He knows finding a job will be tough but plans to continue doing his research on air pollution and climate change.“Regardless of age, we can all make a difference,” he said.This story was reported by the Thomson Reuters Foundation.

19 - In US-Mexico border towns, pandemic hits businesses especially hard
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2021/0105/In-US-Mexico-border-towns-pandemic-hits-businesses-especially-hard
The deafening silence seems to wash over Isabel Navarro as she watches the empty aisles of the clothing and trinket store she’s owned for the past 11 years.It’s among dozens of businesses selling low-priced clothing, shoes, toys, perfumes, and a vast array of products that make up the once-bustling downtown of Nogales, Arizona.Ms. Navarro’s shop, Mis Divinas, sits just a block away from a pedestrian crossing connecting the small 20,000-population border town to its sprawling 200,000-population sister city of Nogales, Mexico. Every year, business owners like Ms. Navarro wait in anticipation for crowds of Mexican families and workers touting their aguinaldos, end-of-year bonuses, to flood over the border and through their doors.But as border closures from the beginning of the pandemic stretch on, the U.S. side feels more like a ghost town. The challenge persists into the new year, even while the harshest effects were felt in the just-finished holiday season.“This is when we make all of our money,” Ms. Navarro says in the days leading up to Christmas. “But this year, their aguinaldo isn’t going to be spent here. It’s going to stay in Mexico.”Peering out to an empty street, she adds, “It looks very sad.”The U.S., Mexico, and Canada imposed restrictions on land border crossings in March to stop the spread of the virus. Eight months later, land ports on the Mexico border are open for essential activities like work and medical appointments, and to U.S. citizens and green card holders.But regular foot traffic from Mexican shoppers vital to businesses on the U.S. side of the border has come to a near standstill. As those restrictions run until at least Jan. 21, economies across the 2,000-mile U.S.-Mexico border have crumbled.“Border economies are interdependent,” explains Irasema Coronado, director of the School of Transborder Studies at Arizona State University. “There are many businesses on the U.S. side of the border that rely and thrive on Mexican shoppers. ... Likewise, there are businesses in Mexico that rely on U.S. shoppers to come and buy.” Christopher Wilson, deputy director of the Wilson Center’s Mexico Institute, describes the extended closures as an “early stay-at-home order that never went away.”“It’s partially the closure of the border, but also a result of the COVID recession everyone is facing,” Mr. Wilson says. “These communities are getting a double dose of what communities across Mexico and the United States are facing.”Small-business owners like Ms. Navarro were left reeling. Ms. Navarro, born on the Mexican side of Nogales, once crossed with her family to do holiday shopping in stores like the one she currently runs. Now a permanent resident in the U.S., she opened Mis Divinas in downtown Nogales in 2009 and slowly built her business up to four locations.In the pandemic, she says she lost at least 90% of her customers. Other business owners and employees say the number is closer to 99%.Aisles of sparkle-studded jackets, hair baubles, bed sets, strollers, bows, and plastic toys lie dormant. Once, she explains, the place was so full she wouldn’t have been able to walk. Now they’re fortunate if 10 people a day come through.“I had four shops, I had to close two already. And if things don’t get better, I will have to close another,” she explains. “I feel sad, really sad. Because it was a lot of work to build it ... then everything began to collapse.”Before the pandemic, an estimated 350 million people would cross through ports along the U.S.-Mexico border by foot or vehicle every year. In April 2020, the first full month of closures, crossings by foot, car, and bus in Nogales fell to just a fifth of what they were in April 2019, data from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics shows.The impact has been felt up and down the border in other sister cities like El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juárez in the Mexican state of Chihuahua; and San Diego, California, and Tijuana in the Mexican state of Baja California.One report by the Baker Institute for Public Policy concluded that counties along the Texas-Mexico border had lost nearly $4.9 billion in economic activity between March and November 2020 due to COVID-19 border closures. The retail sector in those regions has lost approximately $2 billion in eight months, and local governments have lost around $242.6 million in sales tax revenue alone, according to the report.Dr. Coronado grew up on the Arizona side of Nogales and says she remembers watching her mother write a shopping list for Nogales, Arizona, and Nogales in the Mexican state of Sonora every week. “A good binational shopper knows, ‘I can buy this in the U.S., I can buy that in Mexico, and I live better by using both economies,’” she says. Both sides of the border survive off one another, she says, and when they’re cut off, both sides wither. She worries that such economies may never fully recover.Peter Han, the owner of a sportswear shop down the street from Ms. Navarro, wonders the same.Perched behind his register, he leans back in his chair with a checkered fedora on his head. He’s owned the store for 30 years, but says he left his shop closed throughout the pandemic. He has opened the week before Christmas with an inkling of hope that there might be business.“I’m checking to see how many people come. Maybe next year I’ll close. I’ve been thinking about it a lot. That’s why I came in,” he explains.But Mr. Han has long stopped peering toward the entrance. Instead, he rather lazily watches Korean singing shows from an old TV set tucked in the corner. The muffled songs are the only sound coming from the shop.Outside, handwritten signs dot empty display windows of nearby stores. They read, “local en renta,” or “spot for rent,” and “A todos nuestros clientes, se les comunica que permanecerá cerrado hasta nuevo aviso,” or “To all of our customers, this is an advisory that the store will remain closed until further notice.” Padlocked and chained doors stretch down the street, and a few stray shoppers wander between the handful of stores that still remain open.“No one has come in. Yesterday, only three people came in. Yesterday, I only earned $10,” Mr. Han says, laughing. “Today, it’s nothing.”Editor’s note: As a public service, we have removed our paywall for all pandemic-related stories.

20 - Why US stock markets closed out 2020 at record highs
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Business/2020/1231/Why-US-stock-markets-closed-out-2020-at-record-highs
Wall Street closed out a tumultuous year for stocks with more record highs Thursday, a fitting coda to the market’s stunning comeback from its historic plunge in the early weeks of the coronavirus pandemic.The benchmark S&P 500 index finished with a gain of 16.3% for the year, or a total return of about 18%, including dividends. The Nasdaq composite, powered by high-flying Big Tech stocks, soared 43.6%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 7.2%, with Apple and Microsoft leading the way.The market’s milestone-setting finish follows a mostly upward grind for stocks in recent weeks, fueled by cautious optimism that the U.S. economy and corporate profits will bounce back in 2021 now that the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines is under way.“We came into the year expecting slow growth and it turned out to be the fastest bear market recovery in history,” said Sunitha Thomas, national portfolio advisor at Northern Trust Wealth Management.The virus pandemic shocked markets early in the year. The S&P 500 fell 8.4% in February, then plunged 12.5% in March as the pandemic essentially froze the global economy. Businesses shut down in the face of the virus threat and tighter government restrictions. People shifted to working, shopping and doing pretty much everything else from home.The dire economic situation weighed heavily on almost any company that relied on direct consumer spending or a physical presence, including airlines, restaurants, hotels and mall-based retailers.Trading became volatile, especially in the early weeks of the pandemic, as investors scrambled amid an increasingly grim economic outlook. The Dow had several day-to-day swings of about 2,000 points. And the S&P 500 rose or fell by at least 1% on twice as many days in 2020 than it did, on average, since 1950.The VIX, which measures how much volatility investors expect from the S&P 500, climbed to a record high 82.69 in March and remained above its historical average for much of the year.The wave of selling accelerated as the economic fallout from the pandemic widened, leaving many long-term investors looking on as their gains after a blockbuster 2019 for stocks evaporated. Five months later, the market recouped all of its losses.“It was probably very hard to imagine getting those back in such a short period fo time,” said Shawn Cruz, senior market strategist at TD Ameritrade.Wall Street didn’t stay down for long, thanks in large part to unprecedented actions from the Federal Reserve and Congress to support the economy. Investors flocked to big technology companies such as Apple and Amazon and smaller companies like Grubhub and Etsy that were poised to take advantage of the shift to working and shopping from home.On Dec. 30, Apple's stock market value totaled $2.29 trillion, up 133% since March 23. Meanwhile, Congress recently approved nearly $300 billion in additional relief for small businesses, money that many hard-hit owners only hope can help them survive until the pandemic finally easesThe success of Apple and other big technology companies and the struggles of the smallest of businesses is just one example of how the pandemic created winners and losers in the business world in 2020. Wall Street recovered after March; Main Street is still struggling.The S&P 500 jumped 12.7% in April. From there, markets disconnected from the rest of the still-reeling economy and pushed higher in fits and starts as vaccine development progressed and analysts and economists looked ahead to the eventual end of the pandemic.Individual investors, sometimes referred to as retail investors on Wall Street, hopped onto the market rally via commission-free online trading platforms like Robinhood. Along the way, they helped power shares in companies like Tesla to new heights. The electric car maker jumped 743.4% in 2020 for the biggest gain in the S&P 500.“Retail investors represented a larger portion of the market than they ever have,” Cruz said. “It was retail and institutional investors all coming to the same conclusion about what was going to work and what wasn’t going to work this year at the same time.”The market’s turnaround was faster than anyone might have expected in March, when the S&P 500′s nearly 11-year bull-market run ended. By August, the index had recovered all of its losses and climbed to new highs. All told, the S&P 500 set 33 record highs in 2020.“It was another reminder that unless you have a foolproof market timing technique the adage to remember is it’s always better buy than bail,” said Sam Stovall, chief investment strategist at CFRA.The end of the virus and its pummeling of the economy seems even closer now that vaccine approval and distribution is ramping up. The U.S. and U.K. have both approved Pfizer’s COVID-19 vaccine and Britain recently approved another vaccine from AstraZeneca and Oxford University. Meanwhile, the U.S. government has approved another round of aid for businesses and people dealing with another surge in the virus and tighter restrictions on businesses.Thomas expects pent-up demand and high savings rates to help drive an economic recovery in 2021. Many of the more beaten-down stocks will benefit from a “vaccine-shaped” recovery as the number of vaccines on the market increases and distribution widens.“We have more visibility that by midyear we start to be able to reopen the economy,” she said.The sharp run-up in stock prices relative to the outlook for earnings growth suggests stocks could be in for a correction, or drop of at least 10%, in 2021, Stovall said.“There’s a good possibility that we get a deep pullback — pullbacks being 5%-10% — or maybe a shallow correction,” he said. “Enough to remind investors that share prices don’t go up forever.”Markets were mostly quiet on the final day of trading for the year. Several overseas markets were closed for holidays, and U.S. markets will be closed for New Years Day on Friday.The S&P 500 rose 24.03 points, or 0.6%, to 3,756.07, an all-time high. The Dow rose 196.92 points, or 0.7%, to 30,606.48, a record high. The Nasdaq rose 18.28 points, or 0.1%, to 12,888.28.The Russell 2000 index of smaller companies fell 5.14 points, or 0.3%, to 1,974.86. Smaller companies notched strong gains in recent weeks after lagging in the early months of the broader market rebound. The Russell 2000 ended the year with a gain of 18.4%.Trading was closed in Tokyo and South Korea as well as Germany. France’s CAC 40 slipped 0.9% and Britain’s FTSE 100 lost 1.5%.The yield on the 10-year Treasury note rose to 0.92% from 0.91% late Wednesday.

21 - Amid many losses in 2020, a win for electric cars
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2021/0112/Amid-many-losses-in-2020-a-win-for-electric-cars
Europe’s push into electric cars is gathering speed – despite the pandemic.Automaker Volkswagen tripled sales of battery-only cars in 2020 as its new electric compact ID.3 came on the market ahead of tough new European Union limits on auto emissions. And Germany, long a laggard in adopting electric vehicles, saw more people buy electrics in December than opted for previously dominant diesel vehicles.Those are early signs of what will likely be an upcoming year of increasing market share for electric cars as EU regulations drive their adoption, despite the recession caused by the coronavirus pandemic that has caused the overall car market to shrink.Volkswagen said Tuesday its namesake brand sold 134,000 battery-powered cars last year, up from 45,000 in 2019.Including hybrids, which combine an internal combustion engine and an electric motor, sales of electrified cars reached 212,000, up from 82,000 in 2019.Volkswagen’s announcement comes as the auto industry association in Germany reports that one in four cars sold in the country in December had an electric motor, uptake that was supported by incentives as part of the government stimulus package during the COVID-19 recession.Battery and hybrid cars took 26.6% of sales that month, running ahead of diesel cars, which had 26.2%. That is also a token of diesel’s steep decline after Volkswagen’s 2015 scandal involving diesel cars rigged to cheat on emissions tests.Electric cars have so far been a small but rapidly growing slice of the European market. According to the European Automobile Manufacturers Association, in the July-September quarter of 2020 9.9% of cars sold were chargeable vehicles, up from 3.0% a year earlier. The association publishes full-year statistics on Feb. 4.Automakers in the EU must sell more zero-emission cars in order to meet tougher fleet average limits on emissions of carbon dioxide, the primary greenhouse gas blamed for climate change. Those limits came fully into effect on Jan. 1. Failure to achieve a fleet average of less than 95 grams of carbon dioxide per kilometer driven can mean heavy fines.Sales have been driven by government incentives, and by an increasing number of new models that – like the ID.3 – were designed purely as electric cars, rather than being converted from internal combustion models. Electric-only design can mean more interior space as a selling point. The compact ID.3 isn’t coming to the United States market, where Volkswagen will offer the electric ID.4 sport-utility vehicle made on the same mechanical base.Demand has been held back by lack of places to charge electric cars, including for people who live in apartment buildings and can’t install a charging box at home. Germany’s auto association, the VDA, said there’s only one publicly available charging station for every 17 electric cars.California-based Tesla has been a major factor in the electric upswing with its Model 3 and its proprietary network of fast-charging stations.The government in China, the world’s largest auto market, is also pressing carmakers to lower emissions.The uptake of electric vehicles has been slower in the U.S., where regulatory pressure has been weaker and where gasoline costs as little as $2 per gallon, depending on the region. That compares to 1.30 euros per liter of gas, or $6 per gallon in Germany, much of which can be attributed to taxation.This story was reported by Associated Press. 

22 - How 60,000 discarded flip-flops ended up on a remote island
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2021/0107/How-60-000-discarded-flip-flops-ended-up-on-a-remote-island
In different parts of the world, environmental catastrophes happen in different ways. In Australia and California last year, it was a series of ferocious wildfires. In Venezuela and Mauritius, there were massive oil spills. In the Horn of Africa, locusts. And at the remote Aldabra atoll in Seychelles, disaster is unfolding in the form of abandoned fishing gear and 60,000 discarded flip-flops.That footwear composed about a quarter of the nearly 28 tons of plastic debris collected over five weeks in 2019 by the Aldabra Clean Up Project (ACUP), a team of 12 volunteers from Seychelles and Oxford University. The project’s aim was to put a number to the atoll’s marine plastic pollution problem and to calculate the cost of cleaning it up. In a paper published in Scientific Reports in September 2020, the team estimated that they had collected about 5% of the total amount of litter that had washed up on the atoll.Thanks to a convergence of ocean currents, some of the most remote islands on Earth – small island countries like Seychelles and Maldives in the Indian Ocean as well as islands in the Atlantic, Pacific, and Caribbean – are bearing the brunt of the world’s marine plastic pollution.The problem is getting worse: A study published in July 2020 by the Pew Charitable Trusts found that, if current trends continue, plastic flows into the ocean are expected to nearly triple by 2040, reaching 32 million tons – the equivalent of about 35 pounds for every foot of the world’s coastlines. And in December, the marine conservation organization Oceans Asia reported that an estimated 1.56 billion face masks likely ended up in the oceans in 2020.The good news is that immediate action could stem that flow by 80%, according to the Pew study. Many countries – with the notable exception of the United States – say they are prepared to do just that. At a virtual meeting in November, two-thirds of United Nations member states declared that they are open to a global treaty aimed at reducing plastic waste. As with all environmental initiatives, the first step requires measuring the extent of the problem, which means more local projects like the ACUP.“Regional solutions that provide economies of scale, supported by international expertise and financing, will be the only way our natural heritage and landfills will not receive waste from other countries,” says Jeremy Raguain, communications and outreach coordinator at the Seychelles Islands Foundation and one of the authors of the Scientific Reports paper.An uninhabited oasis for turtles … and trashThe Aldabra atoll, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, lies more than 700 miles from Seychelles’ main island of Mahé. The nearest human settlement is 400 miles away, on the African coast. This coral atoll, one of the world’s largest, is home to the only wild population of the Aldabra giant tortoise, and is a crucial nesting site for the vulnerable green turtle. Despite being uninhabited and strictly protected by the Seychelles Islands Foundation, the islands of the remote Aldabra atoll are said to have more plastic trash per square foot than any other island on Earth. The debris, carried by ocean currents, has not only harmed wildlife – preventing turtles from nesting, choking birds who have ingested the plastic, entangling marine creatures – but also damaged entire ecosystems.“We do not yet know the full impact of plastic accumulation on Aldabra,” says April Burt, a Ph.D. student at Oxford’s Department of Plant Sciences and the Scientific Reports paper’s lead author. She notes that corals are more likely to become stressed when plastic is present in the water.“This could have an even more devastating impact on coral reefs in the region, which are already affected by several other threats,” she says.A price tag “beyond our capacity”Most of the plastic litter on Aldabra is a result of Seychelles’ tuna-fishing industry, an important source of foreign income for the island nation. Of the more than 550 tons of litter that the team estimated remains on the atoll, 83% is discarded fishing gear, such as buoys, nets, and rope, says Ms. Burt. “The tuna industry is polluting with impunity the very ecosystems it needs to sustain and at huge cost to the regional communities who rely on these ecosystems,” she says. “The industry is not paying for the damage they have done.”The ACUP team calculated that clearing Aldabra of 95% of the litter remaining on the atoll would require a staggering $4.68 million – a price that Seychelles simply can’t afford.Another major challenge faced by such nations is the lack of specialized recycling technology. In Seychelles, only PET plastic, glass, paper, and aluminum can be commercially recycled, says Mr. Raguain.“The variety of pollution ending up on Aldabra’s shores, as well as its state of degradation, is beyond our capacity to manage,” he says. “In the long term, the cost of removing plastic from protected areas like Aldabra will fall upon already-strained conservation resources and SIDS [small island developing states] taxpayers,” says Rolph Payet, former Seychelles minister for environment, currently serving as the executive secretary for the secretariat of the Basel, Rotterdam, and Stockholm conventions. “Seychelles and other SIDS should continue to strongly advocate for concrete and measurable action against the major polluters.”As there is no cost data from any other island cleanups, the calculations from the ACUP are also meant to help Seychelles and other SIDS in planning their marine litter cleanups, which in turn would help them in requesting funding and assistance from the international community. While the extent of plastic pollution on Aldabra is alarming, Brendan Godley, professor of conservation science at the University of Exeter, remains hopeful. “Plastic pollution is an avoidable problem, and there is a tangible link between our actions and their consequences,” he says. “We can all be part of the solution.”

23 - As mountains give way to border wall, where does wildlife go?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2020/1218/As-mountains-give-way-to-border-wall-where-does-wildlife-go
Work crews ignite dynamite blasts in the remote and rugged southeast corner of Arizona, forever reshaping the landscape as they pulverize mountaintops in a rush to build more of President Donald Trump’s border wall before his term ends next month.Each blast in Guadalupe Canyon releases puffs of dust as workers level land to make way for 30-foot-tall steel columns near the New Mexico line. Heavy machines crawl over roads gouged into rocky slopes while one tap-tap-taps open holes for posts on the United States Bureau of Land Management property.Mr. Trump has expedited border wall construction in his last year, mostly in wildlife refuges and Indigenous territory the government owns in Arizona and New Mexico, avoiding the legal fights over private land in busier crossing areas of Texas. The work has caused environmental damage, preventing animals from moving freely and scarring unique mountain and desert landscapes that conservationists fear could be irreversible. The administration says it’s protecting national security, citing that to waive environmental laws in its drive to fulfill a signature immigration policy.Environmentalists hope President-elect Joe Biden will stop the work, but that could be difficult and expensive to do quickly and may still leave pillars towering over sensitive borderlands.The worst damage is along Arizona’s border, from century-old saguaro cactuses toppled in the western desert to shrinking ponds of endangered fish in eastern canyons. Recent construction has sealed off what was the Southwest’s last major undammed river. It’s more difficult for desert tortoises, the occasional ocelot, and the world’s tiniest owls to cross the boundary.“Interconnected landscapes that stretch across two countries are being converted into industrial wastelands,” said Randy Serraglio of the Center for Biological Diversity in Tucson.In the San Bernardino National Wildlife Refuge near Guadalupe Canyon, biologist Myles Traphagen said field cameras have captured 90% less movement by animals like mountain lions, bobcats, and pig-like javelinas over the past three months.“This wall is the largest impediment to wildlife movement we’ve ever seen in this part of the world,” said Mr. Traphagen of the nonprofit Wildlands Network. “It’s altering the evolutionary history of North America.”The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in 1982 established the nearly 4-square-mile refuge to protect water resources and endangered native fish. Diverse hummingbirds, bees, butterflies, and bats also live there.Since contractors for U.S. Customs and Border Protection began building a new stretch of wall there in October, environmentalists estimate that millions of gallons of groundwater have been pumped to mix cement and spray down dusty dirt roads.Solar power now pumps water into a shrinking pond underneath rustling cottonwood trees. Bullfrogs croak and Yaqui topminnows wiggle through the pool once fed solely by natural artesian wells pulling ancient water from an aquifer.A 3-mile barrier has sealed off a migratory corridor for wildlife between Mexico’s Sierra Madre and the Rocky Mountains to the north, threatening species like the endangered Chiricahua leopard frog and blue-gray aplomado falcon.The Trump administration says it’s completed 430 miles of the $15 billion wall and promises to reach 450 miles by year’s end.Biden transition officials say he stands by his campaign promise – “not another foot” of wall. It’s unclear how Mr. Biden would stop construction, but it could leave projects half-finished, force the government to pay to break contracts, and anger those who consider the wall essential to border security.“Building a wall will do little to deter criminals and cartels seeking to exploit our borders,” Mr. Biden’s transition team has said. It says Mr. Biden will focus on “smart border enforcement efforts, like investments in improving screening infrastructure at our ports of entry, that will actually keep America safer.”Environmentalists hope for an ally in Alejandro Mayorkas, Mr. Biden’s nominee to lead the Department of Homeland Security, which oversees Customs and Border Protection.Until construction is stopped, “every day, it will be another another mile of borderlands being trashed,” Mr. Serraglio said.Environmental law attorney Dinah Bear said Mr. Biden’s administration could terminate building contracts, which would allow companies to seek settlements. What that would cost isn’t clear because the contracts aren’t public, but Ms. Bear said it would pale in comparison to the price of finishing and maintaining the wall. Military funds reappropriated under a national emergency declared by Mr. Trump are now funding the work.Ms. Bear, who worked at the White House’s Council on Environmental Quality under Republican and Democratic administrations, said she wants to see Congress set aside money to repair damage by removing the wall in critical areas, buying more habitat, and replanting slopes.Ecologists say damage could be reversed in Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, where thousands of tree-like saguaros were bulldozed, with some reportedly replanted elsewhere.They say keeping floodgates open could help ease damage done by damming the San Pedro River, which runs north from just below the Mexican border through the central corridor of the Sierra Madre’s “Sky Islands.”These high mountains have ecosystems dramatically different from the desert below, with 300 bird species, including the yellow-billed cuckoo, nesting along what was the Southwest’s last major free-flowing river. The white-nosed, racoon-like coati, and the yellow-striped Sonoran tiger salamander also live there.In the nearby Coronado National Monument, scientists are using cameras to document wildlife as crews prepare to start building.Switchbacks have been slashed into mountainsides, but 30-foot posts aren’t yet up along the area where a Spanish expedition marched through around 1540.The government plans to install the towering pillars 4 inches apart where there are now vehicle barriers a couple of feet high with openings large enough to allow large cats and other animals to cross to mate and hunt.Biologist Emily Burns of the nonprofit Sky Island Alliance said construction will hurt elf owls, the world’s littlest at less than 5 inches tall. The birds are too small to fly over the fence and likely wouldn’t know to squeeze through.“This kind of large-scale disruption can push a species to the brink, even if they aren’t threatened,” said Louise Misztal, the nonprofit's executive director.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

24 - Electric cars are on the rise in cities. Can power grids cope?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2020/1216/Electric-cars-are-on-the-rise-in-cities.-Can-power-grids-cope
A stroll down Stockholm’s longest street that takes its name from the mythical Valhalla, where Norse gods feast and fight until doomsday, gives a hint of the battle today’s power grids face to keep pace with government goals to electrify transport.Early this month, a man selling Christmas trees looked on as workers installed 10 public vehicle charging stations with two power outlets each in Valhallavägen, which is around 2.17 miles long.It’s progress, but not enough.Sales of electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles during the first nine months of 2020 rose by 122% in the European Union, accounting for about 8% of new car sales, industry figures show.In Sweden, electric vehicles (EVs) made up nearly 28% of the market for the first three quarters of the year, with 56,559 fully-electric or plug-in hybrids sold.Sales of petrol and diesel cars will be banned in Sweden from 2030, so many more of the nearly 5 million passenger cars registered today will gradually be replaced by zero-emission EVs.Kristofer Fröjd, head of business development at Ellevio, Stockholm’s power distributor, said Stockholm has fewer than 4,000 public charging stations and will require 25,000 by 2030.Apart from the quantity, there are other issues as Sweden’s power grid is already stretched to capacity at times, especially during the peak demand winter months.On the coldest days, operators will have to balance the demand for domestic heat – and Christmas tree lights – with transport needs, which means that within two or three years, as EV numbers climb, drivers will have to put up with slower charging at public stations.“The grid in Sweden is robust, but it’s very, very old,” Mr. Fröjd said. “We can’t jeopardize the health of our grid.”National transmission grid operator Svenska Kraftnät plans to spend up to 150 billion Swedish krona ($17.9 billion) rebuilding about 3,107 miles, or roughly a third, of Sweden’s grid, by 2030.Officials say that will not be soon enough to prevent capacity coming under strain from around 2022.Environmental group Transport & Environment (T&E) says it is not inevitable that EVs create grid problems.In a report in June last year, it said using old vehicle batteries for energy storage would boost capacity and that charging overnight and during off-peak hours would spread out demand.But significant investment is still necessary.The European Union as a whole, will require 2.9 million public chargers for up to 44 million EVs by 2030, up from 200,000 chargers at the end of 2019, at a cost of 20 billion euros ($24.30 billion), T&E estimates. A further 60 billion euros will be needed for private chargers at home.Private investors could help. But Hannes Weckmann, a director at consultancy AlixPartners, said they are cautious because charging station use is so low for now.Simon Webber, a portfolio manager at Schroders, which has about $650 billion in assets under management, said he is “a little bit wary” of investing because so many players, from utilities to supermarket chains, have public charging projects, the risk is they will not all be profitable.“It’s a bit unclear to me what the success of the business models will be,” Mr. Webber said.East-West divide?Some auto industry executives worry investment in charging will be concentrated in richer, Western member states and the difficulty of finding public charging stations in Eastern European countries will depress demand.For automakers, that would mean having to sell more electric cars in affluent markets to meet EU-wide carbon reduction targets.“If there’s no charging infrastructure, they’re not going to sell the cars,” said Mattias Bergman, CEO of Swedish auto industry group BIL Sweden.Sweden has begun preparing for soaring electricity consumption, expected as data centers, heavy industry, and a rising population, as well as greater EV use, increase demand by an estimated 43% by 2045 from now.That is equivalent to one and a half times Denmark’s power use, Ellevio’s Mr. Fröjd says.By 2045, EVs will consume nearly 10% of Sweden’s total electric power output, up from 0.4% now, Per Eckemark, Svenska Kraftnät’s grid executive manager said.Sweden’s challenges are echoed elsewhere in the EU and beyond.A study published by Britain’s car lobby group in September estimated Britain alone will need 2.8 million public chargers by 2035, at a cost of 16.7 billion pounds ($22.07 billion) versus less than 20,000 today.Jacob Briggs, a senior analyst at energy consultant Cornwall Insight, says the cost of connecting charging station depends on the capacity of the grid behind it.“In one region you could be charged 30,000 pounds for the connection and all the capacity you need for that site, or 300,000 pounds or 3 million elsewhere,” Mr. Briggs said.That could lead to a very uneven distribution of charging points.Back in Stockholm, Eva Sunnerstedt, who runs Stockholm’s EV policy, said the city is working to streamline the planning process and the optimum places for chargers, but there is an element of guesswork.“We don’t know how driver behavior is going to evolve, so right now we’re testing this,” she said.This story was reported by Reuters.

25 - Can the world outdo the Paris accord? Climate summit dreams big.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Environment/2020/1214/Can-the-world-outdo-the-Paris-accord-Climate-summit-dreams-big
For many, it was a moment of unity and hope. Representatives from nations around the world had gathered in Paris in December 2015 and agreed to take drastic measures to curb climate change. But lurking behind the Paris Agreement was the understanding that those ambitious plans would not actually achieve the agreed-upon international goal of limiting global warming to an increase of 1.5 degrees Celsius, says Alden Meyer, a senior associate with E3G, a European climate change think tank.There was an “ambition gap,” he says, so the parties agreed to reconvene and update their goals every five years. On Saturday, the Paris Agreement’s fifth anniversary, participating global leaders gathered once again – this time virtually – to reaffirm their commitment to the accord and to put forth even bolder plans.“It’s all about putting some more meat on the bone,” says Rachel Cleetus, policy director with the climate and energy program at the Union of Concerned Scientists. It’s about “the countries not just making aspirational pledges, but backing them up with credible, ambitious policy plans domestically to make sure that they can meet their international commitments.”“An important step forward”The Climate Ambition Summit 2020 indeed delivered more tangible plans to reach lofty goals from many international leaders. But, experts say, there is still work to be done.“The summit has now sent strong signals that more countries and more businesses are ready to take the bold climate action on which our future security and prosperity depend,” United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres said on Saturday. “Today was an important step forward, but it’s not yet enough. Let’s not forget that we are still on track to an increase of temperature of 3 degrees at least in the end of the century, which would be catastrophic.”For Saturday’s summit, 71 countries submitted more ambitious national climate plans. Many included significantly more aggressive goals than were outlined in Paris, and 45 focused on benchmarks for 2030. The European Union, for example, has now set higher goals than the ones it agreed to in Paris, promising to reduce net carbon emissions 55% from 1990 levels by 2030, a target that Mr. Meyer calls “a significant step up in ambition.”Several countries pledged to go net-zero by the middle of the century – or sooner, in many cases. Perhaps most notably, Group of 20 countries like China, Japan, South Korea, the EU, and Argentina have joined that group.When science meets politicsSince the Paris accord, some countries have taken strides in reducing their emissions. India, for example, has gone from being a growing source of global emissions to being on track to meet international plans to limit warming to 2 degrees Celsius, according to the Climate Action Tracker. The countries that have made notable progress tend to be smaller ones with minimal carbon emissions to start with.But global carbon emissions have continued to rise, and most of the progress made in the last half a decade is hard to measure. There has been a move away from coal in much of the West, coinciding with falling costs of renewables, says Dr. Cleetus, making those energy sources competitive with fossil fuels in many parts of the world. “We know how to do 80% of emissions reduction,” says Katharine Mach, associate professor at the University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science and a lead author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report and the U.S. Fourth National Climate Assessment.“Technologically we know how to do it, economically, it’s the right choice, the lower cost option,” in more and more places, she says. “That we can get most of the way there, to the super aggressive targets, based on the technologies that exist now, for me, is always very hopeful.”But this knowledge, she says, isn’t necessarily easy to translate into climate action. There’s politics to contend with. “Climate models usually have been just physics of how the science works, or in the solutions model space, it’s just straight economics,” she says. “In between the two is how societies actually work.”A fickle friendTo Michael Mann, professor of atmospheric science at Pennsylvania State University and a lead author on the Observed Climate Variability and Change chapter of the IPCC Third Scientific Assessment Report, “ambition is a close cousin of optimism and hope.”“Every bit of additional warming does damage, so we can never truly be too ambitious,” he writes in an email. “But we must also recognize the political constraints we’re operating under and work to achieve progress that is possible under those constraints.”A big concern for Paris Agreement participants and climate change activists is the absence of action from some of the biggest emitters, like Australia and the United States. The U.S. emerged as a leader in climate pledges five years ago, but with the nation pulling out of the agreement under President Donald Trump, that changed sharply. Now, President-elect Joe Biden, who made climate change a central part of his campaign, has said he plans to rejoin the Paris Agreement. But much of the world is waiting to see what can actually be achieved when he takes office in January.“The world is painfully aware of the yo-yo nature of American politics” and the partisan split, says Mr. Meyer. “The question people overseas have is, what can the U.S. deliver, given the political tensions?”

26 - Over 40 US states and FTC sue Facebook for antitrust conduct
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1210/Over-40-US-states-and-FTC-sue-Facebook-for-antitrust-conduct
The giant tech companies whose services are woven into the fabric of social life are now the targets of a widening assault by government competition enforcers. Regulators filed landmark antitrust lawsuits Wednesday against Facebook, the second major government offensive this year against once seemingly untouchable tech behemoths.The Federal Trade Commission and 48 states and districts sued the social network giant, accusing it of abusing its market power to squash smaller competitors and seeking remedies that could include a forced spinoff of Facebook’s prized Instagram and WhatsApp messaging services. The company’s conduct has crimped consumers’ choices and harmed their data privacy, the regulators charged.Once lionized as innovators and job creators – and largely left alone by Washington for nearly two decades – Big Tech companies have seen their political fortunes plummet. Facebook, Google, Amazon, and Apple have come under scrutiny from Congress, federal regulators, state attorneys general, and European authorities. Their once-considerable political support in Congress has eroded.Lawmakers of both major parties are championing stronger oversight of the industry, arguing that its massive market power is out of control, crushing smaller competitors and endangering consumer privacy.There’s little likelihood the pressure will ease up. President-elect Joe Biden has said the breakup of Big Tech giants should be seriously considered.Lawmakers and consumer advocates have accused Facebook of anticompetitive behavior, most starkly in buying up aspiring smaller rivals like Instagram and WhatsApp and by copying features introduced by competitors. Critics say such tactics squash competition and could limit viable alternatives for consumers looking, for instance, for comparable services that do less tracking for targeted advertising. Businesses, including mom and pop shops, might have to pay more for ads if they have fewer choices to reach consumers online.The new lawsuits were announced by the FTC and New York Attorney General Letitia James, culminating separate investigations over the past year and a half.The FTC said Facebook has engaged in a “a systematic strategy” to eliminate its competition, including by purchasing smaller up-and-coming rivals like Instagram in 2012 and WhatsApp in 2014.At a news conference, Ms. James said “it’s really critically important that we block this predatory acquisition of companies and that we restore confidence to the market.”“For nearly a decade Facebook has used its dominance and monopoly power to crush smaller rivals and snuff out competition, all at the expense of everyday users,” said Ms. James, a Democrat. “They reduced choices for consumers. They stifled innovation, and they degraded privacy protections for millions of Americans.”Facebook called the government’s claims “revisionist history” that punishes successful businesses and noted that the FTC cleared the Instagram and WhatsApp acquisitions years ago. “The government now wants a do-over, sending a chilling warning to American business that no sale is ever final,” Facebook general counsel Jennifer Newstead said in a statement.Antitrust skeptics point to newer social media services such as TikTok and Snapchat as rivals that could “overtake” older platforms like Facebook.Facebook is the world’s biggest social network with 2.7 billion users and a company with a market value of nearly $800 billion. CEO Mark Zuckerberg is the world’s fifth-richest individual and the most public face of Big Tech swagger.Ms. James alleged that Facebook had a practice of opening its site to third-party app developers, then abruptly cutting off developers that it saw as a threat. The lawsuit – which includes 46 states, Guam, and the District of Columbia – accuses Facebook of anti-competitive conduct and using its market dominance to harvest consumer data and reap a fortune in advertising revenues.Online ads make up the bulk of the company’s revenue, which reached over $70 billion last year.North Carolina Attorney General Josh Stein, who was on the executive committee of attorneys general conducting the investigation, said the litigation could alter the communications landscape much the way the breakup of AT&T’s local phone service monopoly did in the early 1980s.“Our hope is to restructure the social networking marketplace in the United States, and right now there’s one player,” Mr. Stein told reporters.Antitrust expert Rebecca Allensworth, a law professor at Vanderbilt University, said it is “hard to win any antitrust lawsuit and this one is not any different.” But as far as antitrust cases go, she added, the government has a strong one.“These lawsuits mark an important turning point in the battle to rein in Big Tech monopolies and to reinvigorate antitrust enforcement,” said Alex Harman, competition policy advocate for Public Citizen, a nonprofit consumer advocacy group.The Justice Department sued Google in October for abusing its dominance in online search and advertising – the government’s most significant attempt to buttress competition since its historic case against Microsoft two decades ago.That suit, announced just two weeks before Election Day, brought accusations of political motivation from some quarters. It was filed by a cabinet agency headed by an attorney general seen as a close ally of President Donald Trump, who has often publicly criticized Google.The FTC, by contrast, is an independent regulatory agency whose five commissioners currently include three Republicans and two Democrats. Two of the three Republicans, Noah Phillips and Christine Wilson, voted against the agency’s action against Facebook. And the coalition of 48 states and districts that sued Facebook is bipartisan.Instagram and WhatsApp are among some 70 companies that Facebook has acquired over the past 15 years. But they are the ones most frequently held up by Facebook critics as properties that should be split off.Facebook paid a mere $1 billion for Instagram – considered one of the cleverest deals ever in the industry – bolstering the social network’s business a month before its stock went public. At the time, the photo-sharing app had about 30 million users and wasn’t producing any revenue. A few years later, Facebook acquired WhatsApp, an encrypted messaging service, for $19 billion.Mr. Zuckerberg vowed both companies would be run independently, but over the years the services have become increasingly integrated. Users are now able to link accounts and share content across the platforms. Instagram now has more than 1 billion users worldwide. Such integration could make it more difficult to break off the companies.This story was reported by The Associated Press. AP journalists Barbara Ortutay in Oakland, California, and Gary D. Robertson in Raleigh, North Carolina, contributed to this report.

27 - EU privacy reform could impede efforts to combat child abuse
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1201/EU-privacy-reform-could-impede-efforts-to-combat-child-abuse
Online child sexual abuse could become harder to detect due to privacy protections set to take effect in the European Union next month – putting millions of children at increased risk worldwide, critics of the proposals have warned.Under the changes, big tech firms like Facebook and Microsoft would be banned from using automatic detection tools that are routinely employed to identify material containing images of child abuse, or to detect online grooming.Opponents of the tools say such automatic scanning infringes the privacy of people using chat and messaging apps, but the looming ban has drawn strong criticism around the world – from children’s rights advocates to American actor and tech investor Ashton Kutcher.“Time is running out to ensure proactive and voluntary online child abuse detection methods are preserved in the EU,” Mr. Kutcher wrote on Twitter earlier this month as European lawmakers (MEPs) prepare to vote on the new directive.Critics say the reform, set to come into force on Dec. 20, would prevent law enforcement and child protection agencies from identifying millions of child sexual abuse cases each year – not just in the 27-member state EU, but globally.“Online child sexual abuse is a borderless crime,” Chloe Setter, head of policy at WePROTECT Global Alliance – a nonprofit that fights child exploitation, told the Thomson Reuters Foundation.“Europe is already host to the vast majority of known child sexual abuse material on the internet, but victims and perpetrators can be anywhere. The restriction of automated detection tools in Europe would have major implications for children globally,” she said.Sex offenders in European countries use social media platforms to contact children around the world with the aim of grooming them, said Dorothea Czarnecki, vice chair of ECPAT Germany, an alliance of 28 children’s rights institutions.Some use translation apps to communicate with victims in countries as far afield as Vietnam, she said.Opponents of the new directive, called the European Electronic Communications Code, also fear that banning detection tools in Europe could prompt tech firms to stop using them elsewhere, because they have global teams to moderate content.“If a company in the EU stops using this technology overnight, they would stop using it all over the world,” said Emilio Puccio, coordinator of the European Parliament Intergroup on Children’s Rights.Highly effectiveThe tools have proven highly effective at tackling online abuse and tech companies provide law enforcement authorities with about two thirds of the child sexual abuse reports they receive, children’s rights campaigners say.Facebook, Microsoft, and Google did not respond to requests for comment.In 2019, the United States-based nonprofit National Center for Missing & Exploited Children received 16.9 million reports from technology companies related to suspected online child sexual exploitation.If the directive is approved, the ban would cover anti-grooming tools used to detect suspicious activity and “classifier” tools, which help identify pictures and videos that are not already in a database of illegal content.Leftist members of the European Parliament led by German Socialist Birgit Sippel led the push to ban the use of automatic scanning, arguing that the way the tools are currently used violates privacy and data protection rights.They were particularly concerned that users of chat and other communication platforms could have the content of private conversations analyzed.“Even voluntary measures by private companies constitute an interference with those rights when the measures involve monitoring and analysis of content of communications and processing of personal data,” their draft proposals said.Ms. Sippel could not be reached for comment, but those in favor of keeping automatic scanning say privacy fears are unfounded.“Their sole purpose is to identify and flag abuse of children, not to read or spy into private communications,” Ms. Setter said.Anti-grooming technology uses the same mechanisms as spam or malware filters, so poses no greater threat to privacy, said MEP Hilde Vautmans.“We use these technologies to protect our computers, and we should be able to continue to use the same technologies to protect our own children from sexual abuse,” she said.This story was reported by The Thomson Reuters Foundation.

28 - ‘Free speech social media’? Three questions about Parler.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1201/Free-speech-social-media-Three-questions-about-Parler
Launched in 2018, social media platform Parler markets itself as “the world’s premier free speech platform.” It first made headlines as a refuge for conservative provocateurs who had been banned from Twitter for violating that company’s terms of service. Now, in the wake of the election, millions of new users have joined Parler, pushing it to the top of the App Store charts and further into the mainstream. Q: How does Parler work?From a user experience, the platform mirrors Twitter, just with different lingo. In the same way you would retweet or like a tweet, users can “echo” or “upvote” a “parley.” Posts can include up to 1,000 characters, as well as images, gifs, or videos. To access certain features like direct messaging, you need to provide proof of identification. Although Parler calls itself “unbiased social media,” and CEO John Matze says the site was never meant to become a conservative bastion, endorsements from figures such as Senator Ted Cruz and Fox News host Sean Hannity have raised the company’s profile as a viable right-wing challenger to Twitter. The Wall Street Journal reported that heiress Rebekah Mercer – whose family has backed other companies such as Cambridge Analytica, a consulting firm that worked on Donald Trump's 2016 campaign – is bankrolling the project. The company does not currently accept advertising. Audrey Courty, a Ph.D. candidate studying social media and political extremism at Griffith University in Brisbane, Australia, says it makes sense that Parler would embrace the surge in popularity regardless of the founder’s intent. “At the end of the day, Parler is a business,” she says. “It’s not in their interest to just be a niche platform, but at the moment, it’s a very good strategy to get yourself off the ground.”Q: Can you really post anything? No. The company says they follow the Federal Communications Commission’s guidelines on violent or obscene speech. In a post on Parler, Mr. Matze outlined the “very few basic rules”: No pornography, no death threats, and, he wrote, no “posting pictures of your fecal matter in the comment section.”Parler claims to give users the power to moderate their feeds but experts point out that it more or less operates like a regular social media company. Parler makes it clear in the user agreement it retains the right to terminate an account or remove content for any reason. While debunked claims about voter fraud and QAnon theories are flourishing unchecked, and white supremacist and anti-Semitic ideas are not hard to find, some liberal users have reported being banned from the site after criticizing the company’s legal practices.Benedict Evans, an independent tech analyst, says crackdowns are expected on any growing platform. “Everyone is a fan of free speech until they have some users,” he says.Q: What does this mean for Silicon Valley?It’s unlikely that Parler will replace Twitter. While its earliest champions had nowhere else to turn, today’s top Parler users have remained active on mainstream social media. Outrage over Twitter’s handling of the president’s tweets may have doubled Parler’s user base, which is now reportedly 10 million, but that is still a far cry from Twitter’s monthly active user base of nearly 70 million in the United States alone.But that doesn’t necessarily mean Parler is likely to disappear completely. Mr. Evans says he can imagine the company “dibbling along” for another decade if the Mercers keep funding it and it’s not torpedoed by a scandal – like a “parley” leading to offline violence. That’s what Ms. Courty calls dangerous speech, which most people across the political spectrum agree needs to be regulated.“What we can’t agree on is how to regulate it, who should regulate it, and what it is,” she says. So far, a group of white, male developers in Silicon Valley have been making those decisions, with little to no transparency. That’s certainly not working, says Ms. Courty, but she doubts Mr. Matze – a white, male developer based in Nevada – has the answer.

29 - Why Big Tech faces rising pressure in Congress and courts
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1119/Why-Big-Tech-faces-rising-pressure-in-Congress-and-courts
For the past two decades, the U.S. government has taken a relatively hands-off approach to Silicon Valley, as tech companies have gained increasing influence over our day-to-day lives.But that may be changing. Google, Facebook, and Twitter confront a series of government actions aimed at restricting their behavior, and are besieged by questions from Congress over how their platforms moderate the flow of information. Q: Is Big Tech playing “monopoly”?An October report prepared by Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee outlined what the committee says are anti-competitive practices by digital-era firms like Apple and Amazon. The report quoted Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg mulling the price worth paying to buy up competitors – as the company has done with platforms like Instagram. Now  after years on the sidelines, antitrust regulators are taking action, at least in one case. On Oct. 20, the U.S. Justice Department sued Google for using anticompetitive practices to maintain its dominance over search and search advertising. The suit claims that the company blocks rivals by paying device manufacturers to make Google their default search engine. “The end result,” U.S. Attorney General William Barr said, “is that no one can feasibly challenge Google’s dominance.” Google called the lawsuit “deeply flawed.” “People use Google because they choose to, not because they’re forced to, or because they can’t find alternatives,” said the company in a statement.The suit mirrors the government’s successful 1998 case that said Microsoft forced computer manufacturers to bundle its web browser with its Windows operating system, thus locking out competitors.Q: What about digital-era free speech?When two congressional committees recently called for tech CEOs to testify, the reason was concern about America’s information diet, not just preserving competitive markets. On Oct. 28, the Senate Commerce Committee focused on potential changes to Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act of 1996, which protects internet companies from liability for what people say on their platforms, but also allows them to moderate their content as they see fit. The hearing touched a nerve with Republican senators, who blasted the CEOs of Google, Twitter, and Facebook for alleged anti-conservative bias. The Senate Judiciary Committee, meanwhile, is focused on complaints that digital platforms intentionally limited the spread of a controversial New York Post article about Hunter Biden, which ran as his father, former Vice President and now President-elect Joe Biden, was in the final days of the presidential race.This Tuesday, Republicans on the committee grilled Mr. Zuckerberg and Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey over their content moderation policies, with some, such as Senator Marsha Blackburn of calling for reform of Section 230.Mr. Biden, in a July interview, said that the rule should not apply to Facebook and similar platforms. “[Facebook] is not merely an internet company,” he said. “It is propagating falsehoods they know to be false.”The American Civil Liberties Union demurs: “Section 230 defines Internet culture as we know it,” the group says on its website. It’s why websites “can offer platforms for critical and controversial speech without constantly worrying about getting sued.”Q: What does this mean for the future?While the tech industry delivers many benefits to society, governments around the world have been showing a rising interest in regulation. The worries include that digital platforms may be encouraging tech overuse and eroding privacy among consumers, curbing competition among businesses, and failing to adequately manage their societal role as gatekeepers of information. With a politically divided Senate, prospects for U.S. legislative action remain uncertain. But tighter antitrust oversight appears to be already taking shape, and many Democrats in Congress support legislation to break up tech monopolies. “It would be a historical anomaly if tech were not to be robustly regulated, as other systemically important industries such as banking and food were before it,” writes The Economist.Writing in Jacobin, a leftist magazine that recently had a video removed from Facebook without explanation, Nicole Aschoff agreed that public opinion is shifting in favor of regulation. “Preserving the internet as a place of free expression while simultaneously protecting the electoral process, shielding users from harassment and abuse, and reining in the power of hate groups is an incredibly difficult task,” she wrote in July. “Indeed, one could argue that it is a defining challenge of the present moment.”

30 - Online exams raise concerns of racial bias in facial recognition
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Technology/2020/1117/Online-exams-raise-concerns-of-racial-bias-in-facial-recognition
When law student Areeb Khan tried to sign into the online portal to take his practice bar exam, he was met with a strange message: “Due to poor lighting we are unable to identify your face.”Additional lighting did not solve the issue. Mr. Khan even tried to sign in from the brightest room in his New York apartment – the bathroom.Mr. Khan began to suspect that it was his dark skin tone that rattled Examplify, a test proctoring platform adopted by New York state’s law exam board during the COVID-19 pandemic. It took days of back and forth with customer service before he could sign in.“There are so many systematic barriers preventing people like me from obtaining these degrees – and this is just another example of that,” he told the Thomson Reuters Foundation.As COVID-19 restrictions force students to take remote exams, universities around the world are relying on proctoring software like Examplify. But many students are wary of the technology, not just because of bias in facial recognition but also because of the potential for data collection.“Students are already under tremendous pressure because of the global pandemic,” said Hye Jung Han, a researcher at advocacy group Human Rights Watch who specializes in technology and education. “And now we have this invasive and unfair surveillance pushing the envelope, invading their private lives.”Industry leaders maintain their platforms are a critical part of the infrastructure that allows students to continue learning.“We believe that many lives have been positively impacted by being able to continue their education and careers,” said Nici Sandberg, spokeswoman for ExamSoft, which makes the Examplify platform.“ExamSoft maintains a non-biased identification and exam delivery process to ensure that individuals of color are not disproportionately affected.”Global expansionMore than 90% of countries have instituted some form of remote learning since the start of the pandemic, according to a report in August by UNICEF.This, in turn, has created a booming business for companies dealing in educational technology – or edtech – including firms that specialize in ensuring remote exams are free from cheating.One firm, Proctorio, reported that it was proctoring more than five times the number of exams this year compared to last year.The remote proctoring industry offers a range of services, from basic video links that allow another human to observe students as they take exams to algorithmic tools that use artificial intelligence (AI) to detect cheating.But asking students to install software to monitor them during a test raises a host of fairness issues, experts say.“There’s a big gulf between what this technology promises, and what it actually does on the ground,” said Audrey Watters, a researcher on the edtech industry who runs the website Hack Education.“[They] assume everyone looks the same, takes tests the same way, and responds to stressful situations in the same way.”Facial recognition systems – which some proctoring platforms use to confirm the identity of the test taker – are less accurate with dark-skinned people, noted Shea Swauger, a researcher who tracks the industry at the University of Colorado, Denver.And algorithms designed to detect suspicious movement will inevitably flag disabled students and others who do not move in the way the platforms expect, he added.Students also are balking at allowing third-party software access to their devices, with some services requiring that students give them permission to read their computer files, monitor their keystrokes, and analyze their biometrics.“It’s not just [about] racial bias,” said Miguel Bishop, a member of the student senate at California State University in Chico, which uses the platform Proctorio for exams.“There’s the unaccountable data collection and the damage to the student-teacher relationship,” he said.Proctorio CEO Mike Olsen said in a phone interview that the platform is the most convenient way for schools to deal with cheating in the COVID era.“Taking an exam in the comfort of your own home, on your own schedule, is less invasive,” he said.Critics of the technology often misunderstand how it works, he added, emphasizing that the tools do not directly identify cheaters, but simply flag suspicious behavior to universities.Students rebelStudents in various countries have been demanding their schools reconsider the use of remote proctoring software, with mixed results.In September, the Supreme Court of India canceled a remotely proctored admissions exam at the National Law School of India University, after a parent of a prospective student and a former university official filed a lawsuit.They argued that the exam – which was slated to use AI to detect cheaters – was unfair to students with “lesser means and from marginalized areas” who might not have high speed internet or fast enough computers to run the exam.Students at the University of Queensland in Australia have been unsuccessfully petitioning the university to rein in what they consider to be the most invasive and potentially discriminatory aspects of ProctorU, an American proctoring service the school uses.“We’ve asked them to do things like in-house identity verification, rather than having [the platform] read our ID and do biometric analysis on our faces,” said Rowan Evans, a student representative at the school.Jennifer Buckley, an engineering professor at the University of Delaware, decided not to use ProctorU after she heard from her students that proctors had interrupted remote exams and asked students to show they weren’t cheating.“No thank you,” she said. “I’d rather my students not feel like they’re in a police state.”She and her assistants use Zoom to proctor exams themselves.ProctorU chief executive officer Scott McFarland said that “students should be reassured that all testing data is owned by their schools, not the proctoring provider.”“Schools set the rules about what data is collected, how it’s retained and for how long,” he said in an emailed statement.In the United States and Canada, students at dozens of universities have sent petitions criticizing exam proctoring technology, according to a tally by the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a digital rights non-profit.Patrick Sullivan, a sophomore at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, created one such petition after a math professor asked him to install the remote proctoring service Respondus for an exam in September.He said the software, which is designed to block access to certain functions on a computer while a student takes an exam, would gain access to files on his personal device. “Giving software this much access is playing with fire,” he said.Jodi Feeney, the chief operating officer of Respondus, said that “our applications have also been closely analyzed by hundreds of customers along the way – university security teams, IT staff, students, third-party companies.”
After 1,200 students signed Mr. Sullivan’s petition demanding the school ban the software, the university announced that professorscould not mandate its use.As the pandemic makes remote learning a long-term state of affairs for many schools, Mr. Swauger, in Denver, recommends that schools take some time to do their research and only roll out systems that are proven to work.“Higher ed [institutions] like to perceive themselves as serious, deliberative, evidence-based research institutions,” he said. “When it comes to these systems, that’s all been going out the window.”This story was reported by the Thomson Reuters Foundation. Additional reporting was contributed by Rina Chandran.

31 - Telescope sales and stargazers are both looking up these days
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/2020/1218/Telescope-sales-and-stargazers-are-both-looking-up-these-days
Marianne Denton was looking forward to seeing the rock band Tool in concert this summer with her husband and adult son. But then the pandemic hit, and the show was canceled. So Ms. Denton turned her attention to a different stage: the night sky. With the concert tickets refund, Ms. Denton bought her first telescope so that she could explore the cosmos from her backyard in Reno, Nevada. “It gives me a chance to explore when I can’t go anywhere,” Ms. Denton says.Ms. Denton isn’t alone. Telescope retailers typically see an uptick during celestial events like eclipses or comets. Indeed, a rare event next week, when Jupiter and Saturn align in what some are calling a “Christmas star” because of the timing, is generating stargazing excitement. It is predicted to appear in the sky on Monday evening, which happens to be the same day as the winter solstice.But this year, sales have gone through the roof, no cosmic alignment needed.“There’s no single day event that’s going to lift the entire industry as much as something like what we’re experiencing now where people have the time, they have the reason,” says Dustin Gibson, CEO of Oceanside Photo & Telescope in Carlsbad, California. In the company’s 74 years, he says, this is the largest influx of amateur astronomy customers ever.Many more people have been gazing at the night sky during the pandemic, often seeking to fill voids left in their lives. With travel restrictions, theaters closed, parties banned, and concerts canceled, amateur astronomy offers a tantalizing replacement. “If I hadn’t gotten that ticket refund,” Ms. Denton says, “I would’ve gone to that concert and I wouldn’t have purchased a telescope.”Finding connection from afarThe pandemic makes astronomy a fitting hobby, says Mr. Gibson. People can do it alone in their backyard. But it also offers ways to connect with others virtually, as people post their astrophotography on social media and share celestial experiences at a time when they can’t be physically together.Furthermore, the night sky itself can be a unifying view, says Shannon Schmoll, director of the Abrams Planetarium at Michigan State University. “Right now, we’re all separated. We don’t get to see our families right now. We don’t get to see our friends. We don’t get to see other people. But all over the world, everyone sees the same stars,” she says. “And so we have that shared experience by going outside to look up … and that is something that can connect us.”Some amateur astronomers, like Mike Kieran in Palo Alto, California, have also found ways to share stargazing with a few friends in a socially distanced manner, setting up telescopes six or more feet apart under the same sky.“It rekindles one’s sense of wonderment,” Mr. Kieran says. “When you look at the night sky, you appreciate the depth and the distances and the scale and the unbelievable beauty.”A cosmic boom The pandemic has been almost too good for telescope makers. “We’ve been sold out of telescopes really since the middle of summer,” says Michael Bieler, president of Astronomics in Norman, Oklahoma. Since his father founded the company in 1979, Mr. Bieler says this is the biggest boom they’ve seen – and the industry wasn’t prepared.“It caught every manufacturer flat footed because they don’t have inventory,” he says. And as a result, some orders placed over the summer are just now being filled.While many telescope orders this year have come from people exploring the hobby for the first time, Mr. Bieler says some of the boom has also come from what he calls “zombie astronomers.” These are people who bought or were gifted telescopes long ago but haven’t used them in perhaps decades. During the pandemic, they’ve sought to resurrect the hobby. Mr. Bieler estimates about 10% of phone calls this year have come from such customers looking for replacement parts or user manuals.Tom Frazier in Vienna, Virginia, is one of those amateur astronomers who dusted off his old telescope. “I figured, well, if I can’t go anywhere, I’ll just go visit the planets,” he says.Mr. Frazier had purchased the telescope 15 years ago to peer at Mars in a year when it was particularly prominent. But since then, the telescope and tripod had been collecting dust in his garage.“It was like a reeducation. What I had managed to learn, I had forgotten,” he says. “There was a long time when I wasn’t using the telescope, but I’m still glad I bought it.”Retailers aren’t the only ones who’ve noted a rise in amateur astronomy during the pandemic. The Abrams Planetarium at Michigan State University puts out a sky calendar for stargazers to know what to look for each month. Not only has there been a notable uptick in subscribers, says planetarium director Dr. Schmoll, but many people who let their subscription lapse a decade or two ago have also renewed it this year.“We can’t do a lot right now,” Dr. Schmoll says. “But people, I think, are also getting tired of screens and looking for a screen-free way of engaging.”No telescope neededThe cosmos is accessible to anyone – you don’t need a telescope, says Dr. Schmoll. “You can just go outside and look up.”With the naked eye, she says, you can watch the moon change phases. You can see planets. You can see meteor showers. “You can go outside and see this surprise comet that we had this summer,” she says, referring to the comet NEOWISE. “That was fantastic. That was a really nice bright point this year, pun intended.”Another unique opportunity for stargazing comes this weekend into next week. Jupiter and Saturn currently appear in our night sky at the same time. And, in the twilight on Monday night, they will be passing so close to each other’s path that they might appear as one object, which is being called a “Christmas star.” Although the two planets’ paths converge every 20 years in our sky, they rarely pass so closely to each other and typically aren’t visible from Earth when they do. Saturn and Jupiter haven’t appeared this close together and visible from Earth in centuries. This celestial event is also particularly compelling for Earthlings, says Dr. Schmoll, because, as long as there are no clouds, you can see it from anywhere in the world – including in some places where light pollution blots out the stars. “We can all go outside and see Jupiter and Saturn converging, all over the world,” Dr. Schmoll says. Stargazing can also offer a much-needed escape from reality at a time when Americans’ mental health is growing precarious. During the pandemic, depression among adults has tripled and alcohol consumption has risen 262%, according to two studies in September in the Journal of the American Medical Association.“When it’s dark outside and you’re with a telescope and you’re looking at a nebula or a planet, that’s all you’re thinking about,” Mr. Bieler says. “It becomes like meditation. ... You are stuck in the moment and not worried about anything else outside of you.”

32 - Moon rock samples brought to Earth for first time in 44 years
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/Spacebound/2020/1217/Moon-rock-samples-brought-to-Earth-for-first-time-in-44-years
A Chinese lunar capsule returned to Earth on Thursday with the first fresh rock samples from the moon in more than 40 years, offering the possibility of new insights into the history of the solar system and marking a new landmark for China’s rapidly advancing space program.The capsule of the Chang’e 5 probe landed just before 2 a.m. Thursday Beijing time in the Siziwang district of the Inner Mongolia region, the China National Space Administration reported.The capsule had earlier separated from its orbiter module and performed a bounce off Earth’s atmosphere to reduce its speed before passing through and floating to the ground on parachutes. Following recovery, the capsule and its cargo of samples were flown to the space program’s campus in Beijing to begin the process of disassembly and analysis, the space administration said.The mission achieved new firsts for the lunar exploration program in collecting samples, launching a vehicle from the moon’s surface, and docking it with the capsule to return the samples to Earth, the administration said.“As our nation’s mostly complex and technically groundbreaking space mission, Chang’e 5 has achieved multiple technical breakthroughs ... and represents a landmark achievement,” it said.Two of the Chang’e 5’s four modules set down on the moon on Dec. 1 and collected about 4.4 pounds of samples by scooping them from the surface and drilling about 6 feet into the moon’s crust. The samples were deposited in a sealed container that was carried back to the return module by an ascent vehicle.Much to the amusement of viewers, footage run by state broadcaster CCTV showed a furry white animal, possibly a fox or rodent, running in front of the capsule as it lay on the ground, stopping briefly as if to inquire into the unfamiliar object.Chinese leader Xi Jinping, in a statement read out at the Beijing Aerospace Control Center, called it a major achievement that marked a great step forward for China’s space industry. Mr. Xi expressed hope that mission participants would continue to contribute toward building China into a major space power and national rejuvenation, state-run Xinhua News Agency said.Recovery crews had prepared helicopters and off-road vehicles to home in on signals emitted by the lunar spacecraft and locate it in the darkness shrouding the vast snow-covered region in China’s far north, long used as a landing site for China’s Shenzhou crewed spaceships.The spacecraft’s return marked the first time scientists have obtained fresh samples of lunar rocks since the former Soviet Union’s Luna 24 robot probe in 1976.The newly collected rocks are thought to be billions of years younger than those obtained earlier by the United States and Soviet Union, offering new insights into the history of the moon and other bodies in the solar system. They come from a part of the moon known as the Oceanus Procellarum, or Ocean of Storms, near a site called the Mons Rumker that was believed to have been volcanic in ancient times.As with the 842 pounds of lunar samples brought back by American astronauts from 1969 to 1972, they will be analyzed for age and composition and are expected to be shared with other countries.The age of the samples will help fill in a gap in knowledge about the history of the moon between roughly one billion and three billion years ago, Brad Jolliff, director of the McDonnell Center for the Space Sciences at Washington University in St. Louis, wrote in an email. They may also yield clues as to the availability of economically useful resources on the moon such as concentrated hydrogen and oxygen, Mr. Jolliff said.“These samples will be a treasure trove!” Mr. Jolliff wrote. “My hat is off to our Chinese colleagues for pulling off a very difficult mission; the science that will flow from analysis of the returned samples will be a legacy that will last for many, many years, and hopefully will involve the international community of scientists.”Chang’e 5 blasted off from a launch base in China’s southern island province of Hainan on Nov. 24 and appeared to have completed its highly technically sophisticated mission without a hitch.It marked China’s third successful lunar landing but the only one to lift off again from the moon. Its predecessor, Chang’e 4, became the first probe to land on the moon’s little-explored far side and continues to send back data on conditions that could affect a future extended stay by humans on the moon.The moon has been a particular focus of the Chinese space program, which says it plans to land humans there and possibly construct a permanent base. No timeline or other details have been announced.China also has joined the effort to explore Mars. In July, it launched the Tianwen 1 probe, which was carrying a lander and a robot rover to search for water.In 2003, China became the third country to send an astronaut into orbit on its own after the Soviet Union and the United States and its space program has proceeded more cautiously than the U.S.-Soviet space race of the 1960s, which was marked by fatalities and launch failures. By taking incremental steps, China appears on the path toward building a program that can sustain steady progress.The latest flight includes collaboration with the European Space Agency, which is helping to monitor the mission. Amid concerns over the Chinese space program’s secrecy and close military connections, the U.S. forbids cooperation between NASA and the Chinese program unless Congress gives its approval. That has prevented China from taking part in working at the International Space Station, something it has sought to compensate for with the launching of an experimental space station and its plans to complete a permanent orbiting outpost within the next two years.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

33 - Asteroid samples: Japanese space capsule brings ‘treasure box’ to Earth
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/Spacebound/2020/1207/Asteroid-samples-Japanese-space-capsule-brings-treasure-box-to-Earth
A small capsule containing asteroid soil samples that was dropped from 136,700 miles in space by Japan’s Hayabusa2 spacecraft landed as planned in the Australian Outback on Sunday. The capsule’s delivery completes a six-year sample-return mission and opens the door for research into finding clues to the origin of the solar system and life on Earth.After a preliminary inspection, it will be flown to Japan for research. The extremely high precision required to carry out the mission thrilled many in Japan, who said they took pride in its success. The project’s manager, Yuichi Tsuda, of the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), called the capsule a “treasure box.”What is the Hayabusa2 mission?Launched on Dec. 3, 2014, the unmanned Hayabusa2 spacecraft touched down twice on the asteroid Ryugu, 190 million miles away from Earth. The asteroid’s extremely rocky surface forced the mission’s team to revise landing plans, but the spacecraft successfully collected data and soil samples during the year and a half it spent near Ryugu after arriving there in June 2018.In its first touchdown in February 2019, the spacecraft collected surface dust samples, similar to NASA’s recent touch-and-go grab by Osiris REx on the asteroid Bennu. Hayabusa2 later blasted a crater into the asteroid’s surface and then collected underground samples from the asteroid, a first for space history. In late 2019, Hayabusa2 left Ryugu. That yearlong journey ended Sunday.Japan hopes to use the expertise and technology used in the Hayabusa2 in the future, perhaps in its 2024 MMX sample-return mission to a Martian moon.Why an asteroid?Asteroids orbit the sun but are much smaller than planets. They are among the oldest objects in the solar system and therefore may contain clues into how Earth evolved. Scientists say that requires studying samples from such celestial objects.Ryugu in Japanese means “Dragon Palace,” the name of a sea-bottom castle in a Japanese folk tale.Japan’s research into asteroids also may contribute to resource development and to finding ways to protect Earth from collisions with big meteorites, said Hitoshi Kuninaka, JAXA’s vice president.What’s inside the capsule?The pan-shaped capsule, about 15 inches in diameter, contains soil samples taken from two different sites on the asteroid. Some gases might also be embedded in the samples. The preliminary inspection at a lab in Australia was to extract and analyze the gas. The capsule is due to return to Japan on Tuesday. It will be taken to JAXA’s research center in Sagamihara, near Tokyo.What can asteroid samples tell us?Scientists say the samples, especially ones taken from under the asteroid’s surface, contain data from 4.6 billion years ago unaffected by space radiation and other environmental factors. They are particularly interested in studying organic materials in the samples to learn about how they are distributed in the solar system and if or how they are related to life on Earth. JAXA President Hiroshi Yamakawa said he believes analysis of the samples may help explain the origins of the solar system and how water helped to bring life to Earth. Fragments brought back from Ryugu can also tell its collision and thermal history.After about a year, some of the samples will be shared with NASA and other international scientists. About 40% of them will be stored for future research. JAXA mission manager Makoto Yoshikawa said just 0.1 gram of the sample can be enough to conduct the planned research, though he said more would be better.Why is Hayabusa2 such a big deal for Japan?Hayabusa2 is a successor of the original Hayabusa mission that Japan launched in 2003. After a series of technical setbacks, it sent back samples from another asteroid, Itokawa, in 2010. The spacecraft was burned up in a failed re-entry but the capsule made it to Earth.Many Japanese were impressed by the first Hayabusa spaceship’s return, which was considered a miracle given all the troubles it encountered. JAXA’s subsequent Venus and Mars missions also were flawed. Mr. Tsuda said the Hayabusa2 team used all the hard lessons learned from the earlier missions to accomplish a 100 times better than “perfect” outcome. Some members of the public who watched the event shed tears as the capsule successfully entered the atmosphere, briefly flaring into a fireball.What’s next?About an hour after separating from the capsule at 136,700 miles from Earth, Hayabusa2 was sent on another mission to the smaller asteroid, 1998KY26. That is an 11-year journey one-way. The mission is to study possible ways to prevent big meteorites from colliding with Earth.This story was reported by The Associated Press.

34 - India’s fossil heritage is vast. It’s also under threat.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/2020/1202/India-s-fossil-heritage-is-vast.-It-s-also-under-threat
In 1981, geologists conducting a mineral survey in a cement quarry in Balasinor, Gujarat, in western India, stumbled upon thousands of fossilized dinosaur eggs. Paleontologists believe that at least seven species of dinosaur lived here – perhaps the most famous being the squat, two-legged, carnivorous Rajasaurus narmadensis .In the neighboring area of Raiyoli, researchers have uncovered fossils of about 10,000 dinosaur eggs, making it one of the world’s largest known dinosaur hatcheries. Significant discoveries are still being made across the country. In 2017, the fossil bones of a Shringasaurus, a horned, herbivorous dinosaur, were discovered  in red mudstone of the Denwa formation, in Madhya Pradesh. “There’s an incredible wealth out there, an almost parallel India,” says Anupama Chandrasekaran, a journalist who’s been compiling India’s fossil discoveries on her podcast and website Desi Stones and Bones.But the region’s fossils, like much of India’s paleontological heritage, remain under threat from vandals, opportunists, and indifferent public officials. Dinosaur eggs are sold for as little as $7  in small villages, for instance. Other fossil sites are destroyed through deforestation and mining.“Paleontology suffers in India from various factors, says Ashok Sahni, a geologist at Panjab University whom the Times of India has called  the “father of Indian paleontology.” “Vandalism of fossils is rampant, as there are no laws that protect these precious finds. Lack of access to sites is the main problem, as landowners can arbitrarily shut down mining sites.” A rich fossil heritageThe Indian subcontinent, which collided with Eurasia about 10 million years after nonavian dinosaurs went extinct, is home to fossils found nowhere else, including the 80-ton Bruhathkayosaurus and the chicken-sized Alwalkeria.  The first  dinosaur bones in Asia were found in India by a British captain in one of the East India Co.’s armies in 1828, in Jabalpur, thirteen years before the word “dinosaur” was coined. Ever since then many bones, nests, and eggs have been found across the country. India has passionate amateur fossil collectors like Vishal Verma, a high school physics teacher, who has rescued dozens of fossilized dinosaur nests and eggs and rare extinct sharks in Bagh in the Narmada Valley, and Mohansingh Sodha, who has collected fossils for nearly 50 years.Dr. Sahni grew up around talk of fossils and dinosaurs with his father, grandfather, and uncle, all eminent paleontologists. “India has the largest number of eggs and dinosaur nests from about 68 million years ago, deposited during a time of volcanic activity. We also have a lot of coprolites – fossilized dinosaur feces – which tells you what they ate and how they lived.”He also worked alongside teams of German and American scientists at the Vastan Lignite Mine, in Gujarat, western India, since 2005. They found early mammals including horses and primates in these fossil-bearing layers, as well as several insects perfectly preserved in 50-million-year-old amber. “But the mine was closed down by the owner in 2015,” he says.Such frustrations are common for paleontological sites in India, say experts.  “Many geologists have come back after several years to the site of a fossil find and found it flattened, or a dump yard,” says University of Delhi geologist Guntupalli V.R. Prasad, who was part of the team that unearthed India’s first Ichthyosaur remains.“The main problem in India is that the desire for short-term commercial gains wins over the need for preservation of important sites,” Professor Prasad says. “In the Deccan Traps area, there is a spot showing layers of rocks with beautiful formations of lava flows, marine fossils and dinosaur nesting sites, but the site is being quarried, with apathy on the part of the government officials.”A “grand vision”Even legal protections aren’t always sufficient to protect these sites. In 1997, some 70 acres that covered the nesting sites were designated as the Balasinor Dinosaur Fossil Park. But with minimal security and policing, vandalism and looting of the fossils abounds.Without economic incentives and criminal punishments to protect India’s fossil sites, say observers, these paleontological treasure troves could be lost forever.“Many governments have talked about a well-curated national repository, but unless there is real political will backed by funds, nothing will happen. Strict laws should also be framed for theft, smuggling, procuring, and damaging fossils,” says Dr. Sahni.Intergenerational continuity is also critical, says Sunil Bajpai, a vertebrate paleontologist at the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, who in 2008 helped discover the closest land relative to whales, in Kashmir. “The biggest problem before an Indian paleontologist is that when he leaves a university, the person who replaces him is not interested in his specimen collections or if he retires, the problem is, where does he deposit the finds,” Dr. Bajpai says.  “Young children should be educated on evolution and how long it took for something to come into existence, only then will they understand the need to preserve biodiversity,” he says.To Dhananjay Mohabey, a paleontologist at RTM Nagpur University who has extensively studied the dinosaur fossils at Balasinor, India’s fossil heritage holds tremendous promise.“In spite of all the criticism about paleontology in India, the GSI [Geological Survey of India] is a storehouse of meteorites, fossils and bones of prehistoric animals collected over 150 years, and its extensive collections in Kolkata are available to researchers,” he says. “All the discoveries and fossil finds are funded by government money and not personal property. One has to coordinate with the local government or museums and make arrangements to showcase it, when they leave a department or retire,” he adds. “Besides fossils, the excavation sites are very significant and should be preserved and showcased to the public.”“What India needs is a grand vision,” says biochemist Pranay Lal, author of “Indica: A Deep Natural History of the Indian Subcontinent,” “a living, immersive museum or several small museums that harness the best of technology, and showcase its incredible treasures.”

35 - Trust in science becomes a political issue. How did that happen?
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Science/2020/1123/Trust-in-science-becomes-a-political-issue.-How-did-that-happen
Science has become a politically polarizing issue. A global report found Americans are three times more likely to trust scientists if they identify as left-wing, a political divide that makes the United States an outlier internationally.The survey by the Pew Research Center found that global publics mainly trust scientists to do what is in the public's best interest. But attitudes vary with political ideology, according to results compiled just before the COVID-19 outbreak.This sparks questions about the role of science now and following the pandemic.The questionnaire study asked people across the globe to share their views on science relating to big public policy issues such as climate change and artificial intelligence. Interviews were held by phone or face-to-face.“We saw an increase in confidence in scientists but that increase only came from Democrats and not Republicans,” says Cary Funk, director of science and society research at the Pew Research Center.Recent presidential campaign events bear out these findings. At his rally in Carson City, Nevada, on Oct. 18., President Donald Trump mocked Joe Biden for listening to scientists on the COVID-19 pandemic. Meanwhile Mr. Biden slammed Mr. Trump for ignoring it.Studying public support for scientists and their work is a timely issue, Dr. Funk adds.“It’s of interest because it’s been widely discussed, especially in Western Europe, how much people trust expert advice. It was a good moment to think about how different publics value the place of science,” she says.Expert advice has been heavily discussed, not least by far-right movements who sometimes label the scientific community as elite. One argument is that institutions and universities provide “leftist indoctrination,” which has resulted in several counter-initiatives aimed at restoring balance.That discussion could be reflected in this study where distrust of scientists shows ties to far-right populism.What makes science polarized?Almost two-thirds of Americans who identified as left-wing said they place a lot of trust in scientists to do what is best for them. Among those who identified as right-wing that number was only 22%.Canada had a 39% difference between right- and left-wing respondents. In Australia that difference was 29% and in the United Kingdom it was 27%.Americans have the most polarized views in the world when it comes to science. But the global trend is clear: Polarization is all over the world, and most prevalent in wealthy democracies.Tom Carothers, senior vice president for studies at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, says it boils down to trust. He says that distrusting science has very little to do with political ideology and everything to do with distrust in government. “Science is just another form of authority, and if people have decided that authority is evil then science is evil, too.”An age of distrustThere are a couple of reasons we have been in an age of distrust for the past 20 or 30 years, says Mr. Carothers. Long economic stagnation in the West and concentration of power in elites likely play a role. But migration and rapid change brought on by technology are also key, he says.“People feel things are moving too fast. They want things to slow down and they want things to stay the same. Therefore they distrust the government that is leading the change,” he says.Mr. Carothers points out that distrust of government is more common in wealthier countries, where freedom of speech is sacred. “Wealthy democracies have a lot of freedom of expression and not a single source of information. Therefore if you are distrustful you can find your own community of people.”He argues social media’s only real role in creating divisions is connecting people who are already dissatisfied.The COVID-19 stress testDistrust in authority and polarized views could be accentuated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which Mr. Carothers refers to as a government stress test.“A lot of countries are suffering and they are questioning the experts. They seem to have all the scientific expertise but it doesn’t work … it doesn’t make you very confident in scientific expertise,” he says.On the other hand, former New Jersey Gov. Christine Todd Whitman says the pandemic could have unexpected positive outcomes. “People are seeing the mishandling of COVID-19. It’s really the No. 1 issue in the [presidential] campaign ... which tells you that people are saying that we should have listened to the scientists.”She mentions polls show people trust Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, more than Mr. Trump on the coronavirus pandemic.Ms. Whitman says the Trump administration has contributed to a distrust in scientists among Republicans during the pandemic. “It’s never reached the peak that it has now and that’s because we have a president who just does not want to hear about science. And unfortunately we are seeing the negative impact of disregarding science with the COVID response.”Reuse of any BU Statehouse Program materials requires specific written permission from the author.

36 - Animal traits ‘dog’ the English language
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/In-a-Word/2021/0121/Animal-traits-dog-the-English-language
If viral social media posts are anything to go by, dogs that unexpectedly discover food will return to the magical spot where it happened again and again, sometimes for years. One owner tweeted that his dog never fails to investigate a bush in which it sniffed out a lasagna three years earlier; another dog has been going every day for five years to check out a gutter that once produced a sausage. This tenacity is key to the meaning of the verb dog – to “follow (someone or their movements) closely and persistently.”Many animal names have undergone such verbification, as the process of turning nouns into verbs is called. Sometimes, as with dog, the verb takes its meaning from a particular characteristic of the animal. To parrot is to “repeat by rote” without understanding, like a macaw that can say “Polly want a cracker” without knowing what it means. Beavers are hardworking engineers of the animal world, cutting down trees with their front teeth and using the wood to build elaborate dams, so it’s not hard to see how beaver (away) came to mean “work energetically.” If you have watched a squirrel burying nuts for the winter, squirrel (away) – “store up for future use” – makes a lot of sense. With badgers it’s the opposite. They are reclusive creatures that live underground, but badger means “harass persistently.”In other cases, the animal-verb relationship reflects something done to the animal. The British verb winkle (out) captures the fiddly process of eating periwinkles, which are small marine snails. “I winkled the recipe out of my mother” implies that you had to work to get her to reveal her secret, just as it can be a struggle to get a tasty but tiny winkle out of its spiral shell.And sometimes words that look like verbified animal names are not. I had always assumed that flounder (“to struggle to move or obtain footing: thrash about wildly”) came from the way flounders wriggle around to bury themselves in the sand; it actually appears to be related to the verb founder, as in “the ship foundered on the rocks.” In its origins, quail (“he quailed at the thought”) has nothing to do with small, shy birds scattering in fear, but rather shares a root with quell, “suppress.” Likewise cow (“to destroy the resolve or courage of”) and carp (“to find fault or complain”) cast no aspersions on cattle or fish, as these verbs are also unrelated.Cats are the most recent animals to be verbified. To cat means simply to “act like a cat,” which involves a quiet dignity. Viral lists of “18 cats who forgot how to cat,” though, show felines with their heads stuck in vases or sleeping belly up, offering strong evidence that cat should instead be defined as to “get tangled up in the window blinds.”

37 - A warm transaction
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/The-Home-Forum/2021/0120/A-warm-transaction
For more than a decade, I’ve sold firewood to pay my property taxes. This isn’t just about money, though; it’s how I stay fit and engage with 14 wooded acres, as well as with strangers who wish to keep warm.Over the years I’ve noticed a recurring event. In January, it gets really cold (as it tends to in winter), chilly people make frantic calls to buy firewood from strangers on Craigslist, and then harshly worded posts appear to warn folks to beware of this and that scam artist. It’s unfortunate that some purveyors of firewood, driven by greed or dire circumstances, will stoop to selling damp unseasoned oak to cold folks in need. I’m not here to condone or explain their behavior. But as someone who heats with an ancient Jøtul wood stove and has sold hundreds of cords of firewood over the years, I urge everyone to plan ahead and understand that we foresters are people too.If you know where you’ll be living in winter, the best time to acquire your firewood is the previous fall. In fact, my best client takes delivery around Labor Day each year, and I reward her with the best and largest load I can fit onto my truck. She greets me with a few kind words, shows me where to unload, hands me the right amount of cash (plus a tip!), and then scurries back to her work. Each year I’m warmed by our brief transaction, thinking, “Now here’s a smart human who’s going to be comfy when wind chills dip and the power goes out.”The wood I take to her is always fully seasoned, but even if it weren’t, she’s covered her bases by building in a buffer of time.I also have some close friends who are sort of artsy and not much for planning ahead. Now, I’m all for composing sonnets and living in the moment, but these friends often call me just before a big snowstorm to ask if I’d bring them some wood. Because I love them, I do. But driving home along treacherous roads, I always wish my friends had arranged for me to deliver their firewood some October afternoon when the weather was fine.For a time, I stopped delivering wood after November, living by a fairly self-righteous motto: “Anyone who doesn’t have their firewood in by Thanksgiving doesn’t deserve to have any!” But I’ve mellowed in recent years. Even if there is truth to my saying, I continue to deliver seasoned firewood (if I have it) all winter. But I can’t promise that it will be dry.Recently, while delivering firewood during subzero temperatures to a referral whose furnace had gone kaput, I thought back to my favorite client on that sunny September afternoon when it was so much easier and far more pleasant to haul wood, when I knew that the wood I was delivering was good and dry, and everyone involved was happy and warm. During the arctic blast, all I wanted was to be by my own fire with a cup of cocoa.This is where we all should be in the midst of winter when the snow flows and the power goes, and we sit in a state of grace and grateful wonder, gazing out at the snowy silent world all around.

38 - From Ella to Beyoncé: New museum celebrates African American music
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/Music/2021/0115/From-Ella-to-Beyonce-New-museum-celebrates-African-American-music
When Marquita Reed-Wright was hired to curate a new museum of Black music, she began amassing a unique catalog of artifacts. Among them: Ella Fitzgerald’s fur coat, Louis Armstrong’s trumpet, and an accordion that belonged to zydeco icon “Queen Ida” Guillory. She even drove to funk musician George Clinton’s home in “the middle of nowhere” of northern Florida so that he could hand her his stage costumes – including his rainbow-colored wig. The 1,500 items Dr. Reed-Wright has collected will be displayed at the National Museum of African American Music in Nashville. The ribbon-cutting ceremony for the $60 million museum is on Jan. 18, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, with the doors officially opening to the public on Jan. 30.What most distinguishes this collection is the story it tells. The museum chronicles the rise of African American music and, by extension, the history of Black culture and identity. More than that, it reveals how central African American music has been to America’s culture. As such, the museum sees itself as a unifier, where all visitors can appreciate a shared humanity through a common love of music.“I don’t think the significance or importance of this type of museum can be overstated,” says Shana Redmond, a scholar of music, race, and politics at the UCLA Herb Alpert School of Music. “It’s actually really urgent to establish a location and a concerted effort by experts to explore and document these histories for the public. Black music is really a locus of incredible creation, incredible thought.”A journey through historyThe museum, situated across the street from Nashville’s Ryman Auditorium, is 56,000 square feet and includes a 200-seat theater. It represents more than 50 genres and subgenres, including gospel, blues, jazz, R&B, soul, disco, and hip-hop. (If music had a periodic table of elements, they’d form a sizable block under the recurring properties of rhythm and groove.) Various interactive stations throughout the museum encourage visitors to click on the names of individual artists to learn more about them, their influences, and their impact. Those stations also generate playlists for later exploration.“Some of the interactives we have you can download and share with people after you leave the museum,” says Dr. Reed-Wright, the museum’s collections manager. “The concept of community is being able to share that.” Each of the museum’s seven galleries pinpoints a different aspect of the African American experience. For instance, the Wade in the Water space focuses on religious music, from Indigenous African music through the spirituals and hymns of the slavery era to the gospel music of the 1940s to 1960s. The Crossroads gallery tells the story of the blues – including its influence on country music and rock and roll – and how the 1940s Great Migration of southern Black workers introduced the blues to northern cities. In another gallery called The Message, visitors can engage in rap battles with each other while learning about urban hip-hop culture. A fusion of political and cultural powerToday, hip-hop dominates popular culture. But it took lifetimes of incremental steps for Black music to attain widespread recognition. In the 1800s, many white people first heard traditional songs composed by enslaved people when minstrels in blackface performed them. Later, “We Shall Overcome” was popularized by folk singer Pete Seeger, but it was originally a 19th-century spiritual that took off as a rallying song for a workers’ union of Black women in Charleston, South Carolina. Early jazz and blues music was segregated between Black and white recording artists. It was only after the 1930s that the likes of Nat King Cole, Marian Anderson, Billie Holiday, Duke Ellington, and Count Basie crossed over the racial divide. As white listeners became fans of those musicians, their relationship to Blackness was slowly disrupted, says Ms. Redmond, the musicologist. That didn’t mean that white audiences embraced integration as a result. Attitudes were slow to change. But, later, Black musicians, including Nina Simone, Aretha Franklin, and Harry Belafonte, had an impact by taking a stand for civil rights. They weren’t just stars, they were also political figures. As Ms. Redmond puts it: “It’s not simply, ‘I’m a Black musician.’ So, if you like me, you have to feel differently about Blackness. You have to wrestle with all of me, not just me as a movie star. It’s also me as the person who’s struggling toward a better future for all of us.”That fusion of political and cultural power moved the needle far further than ever before, says Ms. Redmond, who isn’t affiliated with the museum.“All of us have a seat at the table”The museum’s One Nation Under a Groove gallery, dedicated to the fight for civil rights from the 1940s to the present, includes a section about African Americans’ influence as CEOs and producers behind the music. It traces Black empowerment in the music industry. In 1982, Michael Jackson’s “Thriller,” produced by Quincy Jones, became the world’s best-selling album. In recent decades, some of the world’s major superstars have been Black – think Prince, Whitney Houston, Rihanna, Jay-Z, Beyoncé, and many others.The museum’s mission is to educate, preserve, and celebrate that heritage, says President and CEO H. Beecher Hicks III. But, he adds, the death of George Floyd last year offered a pointed reminder of America’s racial disparities. It inspired his team to work with newfound vigor because they believe in the museum’s message – one that has special resonance, he says, following the recent insurrection at the Capitol.  “We are able to proudly say that African Americans are at the center of American culture without turning anyone away, without condemning anyone, but instead welcoming everyone and saying, ‘This is American music and all of us have a seat at the table,’” says Mr. Hicks. “As we prepare to open on Martin Luther King Day, we have to learn to live together as brothers rather than perish together as fools, as MLK would say. And we don’t have to be angry at one another to celebrate one another. We can celebrate together.” Editor's note: This story has been updated to correct the spelling of Billie Holiday's name.

39 - Dr. King was tracked by the FBI. In ‘MLK/FBI,’ filmmakers explore why.
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/Movies/2021/0114/Dr.-King-was-tracked-by-the-FBI.-In-MLK-FBI-filmmakers-explore-why
“MLK/FBI,” a new documentary directed by Sam Pollard, is about many things, all of them pertinent. But its central focus is how J. Edgar Hoover’s FBI relentlessly surveilled and harassed Martin Luther King Jr. throughout his career. Much of this documentation, which also draws on newly declassified files and restored footage, is already known. But seeing it so graphically laid out gives the whole sordid history a cumulative intensity. The FBI’s campaign against King kicked into high gear right after he delivered his famous “I Have a Dream” speech in 1963 at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington. An interagency memo called him “the most dangerous Negro in the future of this nation.”Hoover worried that King, who was widely regarded as the moral leader of the nation, would become the Black messiah. In particular, he thought Black people were especially susceptible to communist recruitment, a point King himself weighed in on when, in an interview clip in the documentary, he says, “It is amazing that so few Negroes have turned to communism in the light of their desperate plight.”But the linkage between King and the FBI’s long-standing mission to expose communist subterfuge in America is something of a Red herring, since so much of what the FBI pursued with King concerned his alleged infidelities and not his politics.Then, too, there is the salient fact that during Hoover’s reign as FBI director, which stretched almost 50 years, the agency was a nearly all-white bastion of G-men, many of them conservative, football-playing, frat boy types – the sort of men who, as pop culture icons, reflected the racial and societal biases of the era. In their minds, they were what saviors were supposed to look like. (Pollard dutifully includes clips from such Hollywood films as “I Was a Communist for the F.B.I.” and “The FBI Story.”) To those who might imagine that the FBI vendetta against King was an aberration, the work of a few rogue agents, Pollard makes it clear that the operation at that time was endemic in the agency.Pollard utilizes interviews, mostly off camera, with a range of King biographers and associates, including Andrew Young, Beverly Gage, Clarence Jones, and David Garrow, the author of the Pulitzer Prize-winning 1986 King biography “Bearing the Cross.” He also spoke with former FBI agent Charles Knox and former FBI Director James Comey, who tells about the time in 1964 when the FBI mailed audio recordings of King’s alleged affairs to his home with a note attached suggesting that King kill himself. Comey calls this “the darkest period in the bureau’s history.” The film also asks why, if the FBI so closely monitored King, it was unable to avert his assassination.To his credit, Pollard does not shy away from the controversies surrounding King’s personal life, especially the bombshell from Garrow, which he first reported in 2019 after uncovering some FBI files, that King may have been present during the hotel room rape of a woman by a fellow minister. It should be noted that this charge has been challenged by such historians as Jeanne Theoharis, author of an acclaimed Rosa Parks biography, who said: “It is deeply irresponsible for a historian to cast such FBI sources, which can be deeply unreliable, as fact.”Since a federal judge in 1977 ordered the FBI to turn over all of its King surveillance tapes to the National Archives and place them under seal until 2027, the clock is ticking on any damaging revelations.Should these tapes see the light of day? That’s the looming question that closes out the documentary. To some, like former agent Knox, exposing them would “serve no purpose whatsoever.”To my mind, if we are talking only about King’s extramarital affairs, this issue is something of a smokescreen. When it comes to assessing King’s legacy, it’s not exactly news that, in their private lives, great moral leaders have often failed to live up to their own ideals. As Young, one of King’s staunchest defenders, says in the film, “There’s always been this unresolved tension in who we are and who we say we are and who we want to be.” Comey says, “I’ve never met a perfect human. People are complex.”King was not a perfect man. But as this film so powerfully demonstrates, he forced a reckoning with America’s racial history that, more than ever, resonates today. It’s a reckoning he gave his life for.Peter Rainer is the Monitor’s film critic. “MLK/FBI” will be available on Jan. 15 in some theaters, and on-demand via cable networks and streaming services, including iTunes, Amazon Prime Video, and GooglePlay.

40 - Blursday, doomscrolling, and the words of 2020
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/The-Culture/In-a-Word/2021/0114/Blursday-doomscrolling-and-the-words-of-2020
So many people had trouble keeping track of time in 2020 that English added a new day of the week. Is today Monday? Saturday? Every day seems like Blursday to people stuck at home. At the beginning of the year, most of us had never thought about social distancing, experienced Zoom fatigue (exhaustion produced by too many online meetings), or done much doomscrolling (“obsessively scanning social media and websites for bad news,” according to the American Dialect Society).The year 2020 gave rise to so many new words – and called so many old ones back into service – that the editors at Oxford Languages couldn’t pick just one word of the year (WOTY). Because of “the phenomenal breadth of language change and development,” they decided that 2020 was “not a year that could neatly be accommodated in one single [word].” Or perhaps they had Zoom fatigue and never mustered up the energy to make a decision.Other dictionary publishers did name a WOTY, and around the world their choices were remarkably similar. Merriam-Webster picked pandemic (from 1666), which comes from the Greek pan (“all” or “every”)  plus demos (“people”). Quarantine (1470) was Cambridge Dictionary’s WOTY, while Collins chose a more recent synonym, lockdown. When this term was first used in 1973, it denoted “the confinement of prisoners to their cells for all or most of the day as a temporary security measure,” but now, the dictionary asserts, it “encapsulates the shared experience of billions of people.” The American Dialect Society selected Covid.The Dutch WOTY, according to publisher Dikke Van Dale, is anderhalvemetersamenleving, which translates to “one and a half meter society.” It refers to how far apart people in the Netherlands are supposed to keep for social distancing – about 5 feet, or approximately the space it takes to write anderhalvemetersamenleving. Japanese publisher Sanseido chose pien, a social media term used “when you’re feeling troubled or when things don’t go your way,” according to lexicographer Ono Masahiro.My nomination for WOTY is orbisculate, “to squirt juice and/or pulp into one’s eye, as from a citrus fruit.” If you’ve never heard it before, that’s because it’s not really a word – not yet, anyway. It was coined by biochemist Neil Krieger, who felt that English needed a term for these acidic attacks. Dr. Krieger died in 2020, and his children are trying to get orbisculate into the dictionary to honor his memory.This word is a beautiful way to sum up the year: It celebrates creativity, humor, and love. I’ll do my part by using orbisculate whenever I can: “This morning I was trying to peel a pomelo, and it orbisculated at me.”

41 - Counteracting violence and hatred
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Commentary/A-Christian-Science-Perspective/2021/0121/Counteracting-violence-and-hatred
U.S. president Abraham Lincoln stated in his annual message to Congress in 1862: “No personal significance, or insignificance, can spare one or another of us. The fiery trial through which we pass, will light us down, in honor or dishonor, to the latest generation.... The way is plain, peaceful, generous, just – a way which, if followed, the world will forever applaud, and God must forever bless.”Recent events have made one thing clear: There’s a ceaseless need for the values of honor, decency, respect, and pursuit of the common good that Lincoln’s message commended. Broadminded, selfless acts of individual leaders throughout history have inspired peace and progress. And they have contributed profoundly to the freedoms we cherish today.In this respect, I’ve been encouraged by the example of Christ Jesus. When facing chaos and anger, Jesus stood with divine Truth. This Truth – this divine, Father-Mother presence, God – was the spiritual power that motivated his every action and established the divine law and spiritual authority that brings about healing. It enabled him to face down ignorance, misunderstanding, and desperation.The stability and constancy of God’s intelligent goodness is present now and can be seen and demonstrated in every kind of situation. What God is and does as infinite good itself counteracts the chaos, disorder, prejudice, and self-interest that would corrupt individuals and disable governments. As Mark Sappenfield, editor of the Monitor, indicated in his recent podcast “A spiritual response to political division and upheaval,” there is no material solution to division, as we’ve seen over the past few years. But the good news is that the solution is in each of us as children of God.This highlights the need for daily prayer that affirms the absolute and forever presence of God, divine Love, the foundation on which freedom for all rests. Prayer for government that is inclusive of every citizen begins with the allness of God’s power, the all-encompassing divine goodness and justice, and God’s unity with each individual. It affirms the true nature of each of us as God’s spiritual expression. It negates and nullifies the supposed legitimacy of evil, danger, harm, and discord.Holding in our own hearts the qualities we want to see exhibited in our government and living them in our lives is effective prayer. This prayer supports and elevates society. It arrests self-seeking, self-interested motivations and embraces the wisdom and goodness of God as divine Principle and unchanging Truth. American Mary Baker Eddy, Discoverer of Christian Science and Founder of the Church of Christ, Scientist, stated in 1900 that among “the most imminent dangers confronting the coming century” were “the claims of politics and of human power, industrial slavery, and insufficient freedom of honest competition; and ritual, creed, and trusts in place of the Golden Rule, ‘Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them’ ” (“The First Church of Christ, Scientist, and Miscellany,” p. 266).She recognized that the foundation of universal brother- and sisterhood is spiritual: “namely, one God, one Mind, and ‘Love thy neighbor as thyself,’ the basis on which and by which the infinite God, good, the Father-Mother Love, is ours and we are His in divine Science” (Miscellany, p. 281).Praying is not about ignoring world events or conflict, but about going up higher – elevating our thinking to recognizing what God is doing, now. We can let peace begin with each of us, right where we are, when we hold a purely spiritual view of all, especially those we feel are at fault. This kind of unselfish action and prayer does not excuse anyone’s wrongdoing or smooth it over; it strengthens the expression of integrity and fosters individual acts of love and peace.As we live the qualities we want to see exhibited in our nations, we are doing our part to elevate the collective consciousness that yearns for a solution to injustice. This requires holding in our hearts even those with whom we disagree. Living this spirit of Christ and striving to see others the way God sees them takes the life out of fear, turmoil, and hatred. We begin to see our fellow men and women as the direct outcome and expression of divine Love.The fact is, no division or conflict can disrupt God’s government of all. Nothing can take away God’s eternal gifts of freedom and peace. As we dedicate ourselves to living our prayers, we can each more fully experience this great blessing now.Adapted from an article published on sentinel.christianscience.com, Jan. 8, 2021.

42 - The Windsor saga: Two peerless books on the British royal family
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/Book-Reviews/2021/0121/The-Windsor-saga-Two-peerless-books-on-the-British-royal-family
It’s been 85 years since King Edward VIII’s reign formally ended when the British Parliament passed the Abdication Act on Dec. 11, 1936. The saga is recounted by journalist Alexander Larman in “The Crown in Crisis: Countdown to the Abdication.” Edward’s departure brought an end to the shortest reign – just 326 days – since Lady Jane Grey’s nine days in 1553 and put Edward’s brother on the throne as King George VI.At the heart of the abdication story was an American divorcée named Wallis Warfield Simpson. Edward met her while he was the  beloved Prince of Wales, and although his father, crusty old King George V, hated even the mention of this interloper, Edward became obsessed with her. Even after George’s sudden death made him king, he was determined to marry Simpson – though she was an  commoner with two former husbands still living and he was now the head of the Church of England.Following closely such earlier accounts as Philip Ziegler’s 1990 “King Edward VIII: The Official Biography,” Larman takes readers through the byzantine maneuverings behind the scenes. Key figures include Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin, who was insistent that the very idea of a Queen Wallis was unthinkable, and the members of the evanescent “King’s Party,” who stubbornly believed that Edward should have his way.It’s clear that Larman has much sympathy for Simpson; one ludicrous pronouncement is that she “had all the pitfalls of enormous fame, and only a few of its compensations.” Edward, on the other hand, is described as a “wretched, quixotic ruler, an obsessed and demanding lover and, bar the odd instance of compassion and decency, a selfish and thoughtless man.” Their shared Nazi sympathies, meanwhile, are mentioned mainly as political predicaments and not moral failings. When Parliament voted on the Abdication Act – which would essentially send Edward into exile – Larman notes that James Maxton, chairman of the Independent Labour Party, called the monarchy “the symbol of a class-ridden society” and openly hoped it would come to an end with the abdication.That didn’t happen, of course, but it’s a sentiment that has hovered over the institution during the extraordinarily long reign of Edward’s niece, Queen Elizabeth II. Observers across the political spectrum have said that it’s inconceivable for the monarchy to end while Elizabeth is queen – and equally inconceivable that it should continue once she’s gone.The deep sources of this sentiment are the subject of longtime royal reporter Clive Irving’s new book “The Last Queen: Elizabeth II’s Seventy Year Battle to Save the House of Windsor.” Irving opens his book with a stark pronouncement: “Queen Elizabeth II is the longest-reigning monarch in British history and will likely be the last Queen of England.”The pages of “The Last Queen” sketch out her biography as a series of embarrassments and tragedies. In each pugnacious and incredibly readable chapter, Irving reexamines all the famous crises of Elizabeth’s reign, from the various scandals of Princess Margaret to the popularly sanctified figure of Diana Spencer (“The specific human cause [of her death],” he sternly writes, “was a drunken chauffeur along with the fact that she was not wearing a seatbelt”).He can occasionally overestimate the interest in his own personal story. But he’s fascinating when he dissects, for instance, what’s known of the “cupidity” and “depravity” that began to come to light connecting Prince Andrew to the late convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. And he spares some withering insights for Prince Harry and Meghan Markle, the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, who made headlines last year when they stepped away from the monarchy (“Months before they announced their exit on Instagram,” he notes, “they were building a website with a trademarked logo, Sussex Royal”).It ends up being a bleak picture of “a family that has become patently dysfunctional,” and it sometimes stirs Irving to virtually bilious ire: “The monarchy is not one family’s property, although they act as though it is; it belongs to the people, who pay for it.”Even readers not kindly disposed toward the House of Windsor may find this a bit harsh. Irving’s  irritation notwithstanding, it’s difficult to look at Queen Elizabeth’s long service and see somebody who selfishly thinks the monarchy is her own property. But these two books combine to make the end of the Windsor monarchy seem not only inevitable but imminent.The Queen celebrates her 95th birthday this year, and a staggering 69 years on the throne. Her mother lived to be 101, but even so, will the world see a King Charles III? Or a King William V?

43 - Lawyer trades New Jersey for Tinseltown – and steps into a murder case
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/Book-Reviews/2021/0121/Lawyer-trades-New-Jersey-for-Tinseltown-and-steps-into-a-murder-case
With a spot-on sendup of Los Angeles and the movie biz, veteran mystery writer E.J. Copperman (pen name of Jeffrey Cohen) provokes plenty of laughter in his latest whodunit, “Inherit the Shoes.”Copperman introduces attorney Sandra Moss, an East Coast transplant with a caustic sense of humor. California represents change to Sandy; she’s a former assistant county prosecutor from New Jersey who’s tired of murder cases, and she’s starting a new job at a large, successful, family law firm.But to her consternation, her first case at the firm – originally a simple divorce settlement – turns into a murder. Her client, the TV star Patrick McNabb, is the prime suspect when his wife, the former star singer Patsy DeNunzio, is found dead with an arrow from the John Wayne film “The Searchers” protruding from her chest. Worse, Patrick played a lawyer on TV and therefore thinks he can do so in real life.On top of that, Sandy must adjust to plenty of other changes: an excess of pineapple pizza, industry insiders with impossibly large egos, a butler straight out of central casting, and a troublesome music producer. Though the characters are exaggerated (OK, maybe the LA stereotypes are only slightly over-the-top) they are smart, funny, and authentically human. Sandy can’t help but crack wise at their antics, and her pointed barbs about the Left Coast are hilarious. Copperman’s humor, however, is never mean-spirited, and in the end Sandy grudgingly begins to adapt to the new lifestyle she wanted in the first place.Copperman skillfully builds characters who each have dialogue and vocal patterns authentic to their backgrounds, be it manservant, studio executive, nerdy archery expert, or private investigator. Amid the colorful supporting cast is Sandy's best friend Angie, who shares similar values, finishes her sentences, and brings a little Jersey realness to Tinseltown. Sometimes the book’s practical jokes clash with the more realistic aspects of the story, but those moments are few.Sandy and her client end up working together to solve the mystery of his wife’s death – and also to find some missing movie memorabilia. The backdrop of rabid fans and ridiculous Hollywood parties is enough to make any pop enthusiast giddy, but Copperman also cleverly lets readers see how silly it all is. A smidgen of cynicism gives this story a slight edge and balances out the frivolity of all things La-La Land.While Copperman’s crime caper has enough red herrings to keep readers from guessing the culprits, it’s obvious where the series will be heading. Charming Patrick clearly has a crush on Sandy and the financial means to be her knight in shining armor, even when she really doesn’t need one. New cases are already being collected for her, and a cast of secondary characters are sticking around – including a sardonic LA police lieutenant, a lumbering but capable private eye, and of course, Sandy’s best friend Angie.If readers are fortunate, they will all return in another quick-paced installment, and Copperman’s California – both a real place and a state of mind – can be revisited.

44 - ‘Big Girl, Small Town’ marks the small victories of everyday life
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/Book-Reviews/2021/0119/Big-Girl-Small-Town-marks-the-small-victories-of-everyday-life
“Not all heroes wear capes,” goes the expression. Some simply persevere despite daunting circumstances and meet each day with quiet dignity. Majella O’Neill is one of those heroes. The narrator of Michelle Gallen’s debut novel “Big Girl, Small Town,” Majella tends to her daily responsibilities with dedication and a dry sense of Irish humor that make for a delightful story.The book covers just one week in the small fictional border town of Aghybogey in Northern Ireland. It’s only a few years after the sectarian violence of “the troubles” has been resolved, and the years of fighting have left a pall over the area that no one can escape. Majella lives with her alcoholic mother, whose health has deteriorated so much that she requires constant care. And Majella’s father disappeared years ago – not too long after her uncle was killed while making a bomb for the Irish Republican Army. She doesn’t know what happened to her father, but she pines for him daily. The story begins as Majella learns that her granny on her father’s side has been murdered. The news causes a stir in the town, prompting comments that Majella can’t escape while working her shift at the local chip shop, A Salt and Battered! The shop is the kind of place where most everyone in town passes through at some point. When they do, they trade in details of everyone else’s personal business. It’s just that kind of town.This might all sound quite bleak, but it’s actually quite the opposite, thanks to Majella’s characterization. Against this gray backdrop, she perseveres with a dogged sense of decency, eventually achieving more than most everyone else in town. It’s impossible not to cheer for her.Though never specifically named or diagnosed, it’s hinted that Majella is on the autism spectrum. As a result, she’s endured years of teasing from her peers. But like everything else in her life, she put her head down and pressed on. A strong student, she successfully graduated from high school. But her next step never appeared, so now she passes her days at the chip shop.However, it’s far from a dead end. Townspeople appear throughout the story as colorful supporting characters in the daily drama. Each has their own backstory, and Majella observes them all with a keen but silent eye from her post behind the shop counter. Marty, Majella’s co-worker, accepts and even appreciates Majella, quirks and all. He may be the closest thing she has to a friend.In a book that begins with a murder and concludes with the reading of the will, it might seem odd to say that nothing much happens with the plot in between those points. And it’s true that there’s no grand apotheosis: The townspeople tend to their daily lives, and Majella sticks to her routines. But the slow, mundane pace is one of the book’s greatest strengths. It allows time to observe and to appreciate, to mark the small victories. There may be no other novel where the purchase of a new duvet takes on such significance and leaves the reader cheering for Majella’s growing confidence.Much of the book is written in the vernacular, and phonetically spelled out; those unfamiliar with the Irish dialect might find it helpful to read aloud. Readers should also be aware that much of the book’s language is coarse, and some of the events described are quite difficult.But it is against this unvarnished backdrop that glimmers of kindness shine brightest, and small steps of progress go the farthest. In the midst of despair, every good thing is all the more precious. Majella recalls her father telling her, “You’re an O’Neill. Part of the noblest clan in Ireland. We were once the kings ann queens a Ulster.”No doubt Majella would make her ancestors proud.

45 - New year, new reading list: The 10 best books of January 2021
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/2021/0119/New-year-new-reading-list-The-10-best-books-of-January-2021
January is nearly always a great month for books, as readers emerge from the holidays eager to dive into fresh piles of books. And this year is no different.  1. Better Luck Next Time by Julia Claiborne JohnsonSet in 1938 on a dude ranch catering to wealthy women seeking Reno divorces, Julia Claiborne Johnson’s novel channels Hollywood screwball comedies. Narrated 50 years later by a retired doctor whose job it was, in his 20s, to squire the guests, the book captures both the high jinks and heartache of his pivotal last summer there. Full review here. 2. The Yellow Wife by Sadeqa JohnsonSadeqa Johnson’s novel is a layered look at the journey of Pheby Brown, a biracial woman born into slavery and, ironically, privilege. Johnson probes deeply into the roots of color, class, and gender in the 1800s. The book strips bare what it means to struggle to survive as an “owned” woman. Full review here.3. The Ex Talk by Rachel Lynn SolomonThis satisfying romantic comedy tells of two 20-something radio producers in Seattle. Shay already has 10 years of experience while Dominic, fresh out of grad school, is certain that he knows more. Natural adversaries, they’re assigned to host a program that offers relationship advice from the vantage point of two exes. Of course, they scramble to maintain the ruse when the animosity melts and their romance begins.4. No Heaven for Good Boys by Keisha BushKeisha Bush weaves an “Oliver Twist”-like tale of pain and faith drawn partially on her experiences living in Dakar, Senegal. Ibrahimah is a boy living an idyllic life with his family. That all changes one day when he and his cousin are sent to Senegal’s capital to study the Quran. Bush poses essential questions about free will and liberation.5. The War Widow by Tara MossIn postwar Sydney, Australia, war correspondent Billie Walker reinvents herself from a bereaved widow to private eye when she reopens her late father’s agency. With a crackling plot and vibrant prose, Tara Moss concocts a first-rate noir detective mystery.6. Featherhood by Charlie GilmourCharlie Gilmour describes with wit and tenderness his unplanned adoption of a baby magpie, which becomes an object of fascination. He uses the episode as a springboard to a discussion of family bonds, principally his relationship with his absentee biological father. This absorbing memoir is touching, painful, and honest.7. Long Time Coming by Michael Eric DysonMichael Eric Dyson excavates the centuries-old mechanics of white supremacy and lays them bare. Five chapters, written to Black “martyrs,” chisel out the bedrock of American mainstays such as police brutality. Dyson asks a necessary but difficult question: Are we really ready to talk about race? Full review here.8. Robert E. Lee and Me by Ty SeiduleTy Seidule, a retired U.S. Army brigadier general, doesn’t just knock his boyhood idol off the pedestal. He issues an uncompromising, searing, full-throated indictment of Robert E. Lee as a historically misrepresented figure and denounces the many institutions that have given currency to the “Lost Cause” mythology through the years.9. The Eagles of Heart Mountain by Bradford PearsonBradford Pearson delivers a meticulously researched and powerful history of Japanese American internment during World War II. He highlights the absurdity of the imprisonment with the tale of an undeniably all-American football team created at the Heart Mountain Relocation Camp in remote Wyoming. Full review here.10. American Baby by Gabrielle GlaserGabrielle Glaser tells the heartbreaking story of Margaret Erle, an unwed teen coerced into surrendering her infant son to an adoption agency in 1961. The empathetic account alternates between Margaret and her son David, up through their poignant reunion, while also illuminating the disturbing history of adoption in postwar America.

46 - In ‘The Opium Prince,’ the personal plays out amid the political
https://www.csmonitor.com//layout/set/text/Books/Book-Reviews/2021/0113/In-The-Opium-Prince-the-personal-plays-out-amid-the-political
Jasmine Aimaq’s debut novel, “The Opium Prince,” is enjoyable on multiple levels. First, it’s a captivating work of fiction that examines how its two protagonists move from guilt and despair to redemption. Second, Aimaq immerses readers into everyday life in Afghanistan with such skill that even a passage about buying freshly baked flatbread is a poetic experience.Set during the late 1970s, “The Opium Prince” is faithful to the historical events that rocked Afghanistan during the period. It’s also illustrative of the deep gap between the haves and the have-nots. And it provides a good example of what William Faulkner believed to be the goal of all authors and poets: to depict “the human heart in conflict with itself ... because only that is worth writing about, worth the agony and the sweat.”As Daniel Sajadi and his American wife, Rebecca, are driving out from Kabul on an anniversary trip, he accidently hits and kills a Kochi girl named Telaya. In a tense confrontation with her parents and other members of the Kochi people, he is let off with a nominal fine. This is in part because, as nomads, the life of a Kochi – especially a young girl – is seen by Afghan authorities as having little value. But it’s also because a mysterious stranger named Taj Maleki intervenes.Aimaq uses this confrontation to set up a contrapuntal narrative between the lives of Daniel and Taj. Daniel – the son of a deceased Afghan war hero and an American mother – is in Afghanistan as the head of a U.S. agency focused on eliminating the heroin-producing poppy fields. Taj, who began life as a nameless orphan, has become a wealthy opium khan whose very fields are the ones targeted by Daniel’s agency for destruction.The main substance of the story centers around Taj’s attempts to manipulate and profit from Daniel’s deep guilt over the accident. Add to this a troubled marriage, jealousy over real or imagined past affairs, and an unflinching look at all the strata of Afghan society and you have a story that holds the reader’s attention.International politics are woven throughout the narrative. While one man is tasked with enforcing America’s war on drugs, another seeks to protect his opium-based income through blackmail and intimidation. Beneath the plot, Aimaq lays out a series of rhetorical questions: Is the war on drugs doomed to failure because so many people (like the nomadic Kochi) must produce them to earn an income? Do the chemicals used to eradicate the poppies cause lingering health problems? Can farmers really make a decent income by growing something other than opium poppies? Is the Western world hypocritical by trying to eliminate the drug, while at the same time being one of its key markets?Aimaq also has a keen grasp of social settings and the psychological interplay that takes place during conversations. At a party at the Sajadi’s, “Rebecca dropped a James Brown record on the turntable. The ambassador gave her a peck on the cheek. ‘How’s my fastest typist tonight?’ She hugged him halfheartedly, like he was a toy she had outgrown, and when she walked away, she curled her fingers into her palms.”Aimaq’s novel also chronicles the collapse of the Afghan government, from the assassination of President Mohammed Daoud Khan to the communist political party that replaced him in a coup. Against this real-life backdrop, the fates of the main protagonists play out almost in the tradition of classic Greek tragedy. Yet the end is not so formulaic; as the plot evolves, an unforeseen transformation takes place.Aimaq herself is Afghan-Swedish, and growing up in Afghanistan has allowed her to write about the people of that country with authority and clarity. Readers will come away with a deeper understanding of the land and its inhabitants, and will also have reason to anticipate her next literary effort.
